---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# International and Interdisciplinary Design Studies with Turkish Roots

Deniz Hasirci

## Condensed Background

Now that everyone is a designer of sorts and that “design” has become a
household concept, what does it really mean to be in the field of Design
Studies, a graduate of Design Studies, and what do we really mean by
design studies in various contexts, and with a focus on a Turkish
localization?

We planned this book as an edited manuscript on various issues
surrounding Design Studies, written in literary essay form, as
think-pieces, rather than defensive academic papers, with research that
ranges from case/field implementation ideas to quantitative/scientific
data surveys to social, theoretical, and historical studies from all
subfields of design to address the countless parallel and overlapping
realities of design in the post-pandemic era. The post-Covid period and
unprecedented earthquake that has taken place at the beginning of 2023
in Turkey, have made us question the role of design in our everyday
lives, while the advent of dynamic technologies in design has made us
reconsider the design realities that surround us.

The year 2023 had a significance for Turkey as it was the 100th year of
the Turkish Republic founded in 1923. With celebrations still ongoing,
there are more pluralities than ever, with every citizen celebrating a
different aspect of the republic –be it freedom of speech, women’s
rights, educational privileges, marriage, or freedoms about clothing.
One aspect of the republic that one can readily observe, is design in
all its many forms, shapes, and fields. Design, in this text, does not
refer to any one field as is often the case. Design, here, is referred
to in a wider sense, encompassing human creativity in any medium from
fashion to architecture. This interdisciplinary approach is useful to
understand both the Turkish context and intricate cultural references
and nuances, as well as the approach to Design Studies in the framework
of this book.

A country of rapid socio-economic change and a dynamic flux of ideas
pouring both from Asia and Europe and with land on both continents,
design has always been at the center of discourse and a matter of
national and personal identity in Turkey. Although often discussed
alongside Westernization, progress and modernization in Turkey was
always in touch with its roots. Even in efforts establish classical
music in the international sense in the new Turkish Republic in 1924
through the establishment of the Risayet-i Cumhur Musiki Heyeti (today,
the Presidential Symphony Orchestra), the aim was to aspire to develop
music that was based in a folkloric background. Signifying the
importance of music as an essential element of modernization and
developmental feature of identity, Atatürk, the founder of the Republic
stated;

> You do not need music in life. This is because life itself is music. A
> creature that has nothing to do with music is not a human being. If
> the issue is life, there is an existence of music, life without music
> cannot exist anyway. Music is the joy, soul, life, and everything. And
> thus, one must aspire to create quality music…[^0_A1_Hasirci_1]

This statement also involves the contextual design of the culture of
music, taken in its general and interdisciplinary sense, with its
architecture, interior design, furniture, communication, and clothing.

As another example of localized internationalization of design acting as
representation of a modernizing people, both nationally and
internationally, the third and new building of the Grand National
Assembly of Turkey (GNAT, designed in 1936 and opened its doors in 1961)
was designed by the Austrian architect Clemens Holzmeister, with several
Anatolian and Turkish materials, patterns, textures, and practices
embedded into design decisions at each scale.[^0_A1_Hasirci_2]

Perhaps, partly as an effect of being one of the youngest populations in
Europe, the Turkish response to new design has been relatively in favor
of adaptation even if there was to be a process of resistance at first.5
One can observe this even if it meant to change behavioral habits for
the design, as one can observe in the changing of bathroom habits to
more Westernized ones in the early 30s and 40s, learning the use of the
classic lavatory, bidet, and sink, rather than allaturca toilet, kurna,
and hammams. These behavior changes through design were further followed
by multidisciplinary design competitions that included ceramics artists,
industrial designers, interior designers, and architects, to explore
where design could take us (Figure 1).[^0_A1_Hasirci_3]

![](media/image1.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.092361111111111in"}Figure
1. Localized interpretations of modern Turkish hygienic practices,
1970s.[^0_A1_Hasirci_4]

Following these years, modern design always reflected these
interpretations and adaptations. Each coffee table designed by the
modernist SİM Mobilya furniture company was unique as they carried
interpretations of local patterns and textures of the working women at
the production factory (Figure 2).[^0_A1_Hasirci_5] SİM Mobilya had carried this
interpretive modernism to everything from their paperwork to the
architecture of their headquarters and practice. Although this
particular company does not exist today, this was a general trend in all
fields of design, as both producers and consumers demanded that they see
recognizable features in the ever-changing world around them at great
speed.

![A table with a marble top Description automatically generated with
medium confidence](media/image2.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="1.6979166666666667in"}Figure 2. Localized interpretations of
modern Turkish furniture, SİM Mobilya furniture company, 1960s.[^0_A1_Hasirci_6]

## Defining Design Studies in Turkey

Defining Design Studies in Turkey requires this back and forth movement
in time and scale, with the need to connect to Turkish roots as well as
current events such as the distinct experience of the Covid-19 pandemic
and devastating earthquakes of the past years; but at the same time,
following fast-paced developments at the international scale, in the
most visionary and advanced manner possible. For this book, quality
papers were collected from authors from different Graduate Programs
related to the field of design. The book mainly discusses responses to
the following questions:

● What role does design play in the light of these challenges and
developments?

● How do these realities bind and unbound the designers?

● What are the new limits and/or horizons of design?

● How is the field of design expanding?

● Within the context of these facts, what happens to other
design-related subfields?

● What are the current dilemmas in these subfields and what are the new
approaches?

● Are these also defined by boundaries? Or, have past boundaries been
broken?

● How do digital technologies (AI, VR/AR/XR, metaverse etc.) influence
our expectations of design?

● How do disasters inform design?

In terms of context; the aim within the framework of the book is to
bring together opinions from various design and/or disciplinary
backgrounds develop a common and integrated design understanding through
philosophy, culture, history, theory and contemporary discourse, and
also by considering the interactions between arts and science fields.

In our book, we put the post-pandemic era at the focus. The pandemic,
earthquakes, fires, elections, large threats, carry great significance
in reminding us of community with its various levels and of the reasons
for which we do what we do in design academia, especially after/during a
devastating time for our planet. Now, we face yet another era where AI
will be actively and increasingly be present. I do not mean this in the
sense of Terminator or the Matrix, where AI is immediately labeled as
the evil forces. I mean this in the most objective way; this is here,
how will we choose to integrate it in design practice and discourse? The
issue will not be about the use of Chat GPT in research papers in
academia; it will be on a larger scale and affecting our whole lives,
bringing an end to organic life on earth. Studio Snoop presented the
"world's first AI designer" at the Milan design week. This report
introduces the world's first AI designer developed by Studio Snoop. This
AI designer, with its powerful machine learning and generation
algorithms, is able to automatically and quickly create designs with a
unique style.[^0_A1_Hasirci_7]

Recently, in the face of AI design, designers and practitioners are
really looking forward to and afraid of being hurt, maybe designers can
hold a "if you can't fight it, join it" attitude, and learn more about
the ability and future development of AI design. This can be done by
thinking of AI as a partner rather than a competitor: The advent of AI
designers does not mean that designers will be replaced, but rather
provides a new model of collaboration. Designers should learn to work
with AI and make good use of AI technology to enhance their design
abilities. Understand the application scenarios and limitations of AI
and see it as a powerful tool to work with AI to create better designs.
Moreover, one will need to adopt an attitude of continuous learning and
updating skills: The rapid development of AI design techniques requires
designers to maintain an attitude of continuous learning. Designers
should be actively informed about the latest AI techniques and tools and
apply them in practice. At the same time, one will need to continuously
update design skills and develop the expertise and skills needed to work
with AI in order to stay competitive. There will also be an emphasis on
creativity and humanistic care: While AI can deliver efficient and fast
design solutions, designers have unique creativity and emotional
connection as well as hands on experience, that AI cannot replace (at
least for now). Designers will need to focus on cultivating their own
creative mind and humanistic care, using design as a way to express and
connect human emotions, conveying values and social meaning through
design.

## Design Sciences

In the design fields, science appears to be a candle in the dark that
makes one uncomfortable at first, but provides a solid basis in design
processes with related meaning attached. Design sciences helps one
understand and predict. Oftentimes, science creates more questions
rather than answers. We depend on science. If one were to be in a dire
situation, such as choking, would they wish for a prayer or a Heimlich
maneuver? I respond to the trivializing attitude some show regarding
design sciences with bafflement. Design research cannot be understood as
a matter of individual profit and/or loss. It is, rather, for the
collective good; it is important voluntary input into the wider system
of contributing to knowledge and academic publishing upon which the
contemporary academic profession is symbiotically dependent, as well as
inform good design that is not only neutral to, but beneficial for the
health of our planet. In the “scientification” of design and the search
for truth in design, quantification has increasingly become a
requirement. The instrument is almost the first discussion in several
PhD meetings I have attended. We are often drowned in data that is
devoid of meaning.

In a comparison of Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World to Orwell’s dark
prophecy in 1984, Neil Postman states;

> Orwell feared those who would deprive us of information. Huxley feared
> those who would give us so much that we would be reduced to passivity
> and egoism. Orwell feared that the truth would be concealed from us.
> Huxley feared the truth would be drowned in a sea of irrelevance.[^0_A1_Hasirci_8]

In this case, not ideally, method almost becomes more important than the
questions and ideas. I believe that the current approach to Design
Studies needs to continue to be unique in that sense. Design studies
communications also includes close contact with publishers, authors,
readers, and reviewers (our students). It appears we will need to put
communications at the heart of the program. Communication is defined
as[^0_A1_Hasirci_9]; a process by which information is exchanged between individuals
through a common system of symbols, signs, or behavior; information
communicated: information transmitted or conveyed; a system (as of
telephones or computers) for transmitting or exchanging information.

Furthermore, enriched communications require; reading (understanding the
main argument, but also analyzing the structure of the book and where
the book stands in relation to other academic work and to the author’s
own work); evaluation (weakness and strength); and writing (in a way
that brings an insightful approach to the work at hand). Naturally,
science communication necessitates both written and oral communication;
word, the rhetoric, oral communication; writing in both a scientific
way, but also a clear and understandable way, where application not only
includes research, but also in design, there is also the visual
communication. As one is not the ornament of the other, and the search
for truth and critical curiosity are involved in all, critical
discussion is a key feature in design studies.

## 

## In Conclusion

Thus, here, Design Studies has been defined as; not a practical
overarching name, but one with definition and purpose. A significant
aspect of design, and design studies is perhaps its adaptability,
flexibility to the needs of the times. The discussions aim to contribute
to designers developing their own creative, theoretical and practical
abilities for developing a critical and interdisciplinary insight into
design; extending their design knowledge and understanding within an
interdisciplinary approach; familiarize themselves with a wide range of
interdisciplinary research; analyze and discuss the history, theory,
philosophy and discourse of different design disciplines together at an
advanced level. The topics include; design thinking; design and science;
design ethics; mixed methods; equality, social justice, participatory
design; user-experience design; and experiential design. Hopefully, the
critical discussions in this book are a step in that direction and young
design researchers have gained insight from this experience. We leave
the word to them today.

As a final word; the disasters of the past few years have taught us one
thing in particular, and that is to see that everything is finite.
Therefore, let us rejoice in being alive and what we produce, and to
cherish the time we have on this earth.

Richard Dawkins, Unweaving the Rainbow (1998) book intro:

> We are going to die, and that makes us the lucky ones. Most people are
> never going to die because they are never going to be born. The
> potential people who could have been here in my place but who will in
> fact never see the light of day outnumber the sand grains of Arabia.
> Certainly, those unborn ghosts include greater poets than Keats,
> scientists greater than Newton. We know this because the set of
> possible people allowed by our DNA so massively outnumbers the set of
> actual people. In the teeth of these stupefying odds, it is you and I,
> in our ordinariness, that are here. We privileged few, who won the
> lottery of birth against all odds, how dare we whine at our inevitable
> return to that prior state from which the vast majority have never
> stirred?[^0_A1_Hasirci_10]

I love this book and its message. We have won the lottery and have the
privilege to explore, change and adapt within the increasingly exciting
and expanding field of Design Studies. Together with Tuba Doğu, Deniz
Avcı, Gözde Damla Turhan, and Aybüke Taşer who have been a wonderful
support with several of their initiatives embedded in the preparation of
this book, we welcome you to the Design Studies discussions and hope
that you will enjoy what you may find inside.

## References

Atatürk Kültür, Dil ve Tarih Yüksek Kurumu Atatürk Araştırma Merkezi.
(2006). 5th ed. Arsan, N. Atatürk’ün Söylev ve Demeçleri, Atatürk
Kültür, Dil ve Tarih Yüksek Kurumu Atatürk Araştırma Merkezi, Atatürk’ün
Söylev ve Demeçleri, Vol: I, Ankara: Divan Yayıncılık Ltd. Şti.

Asatekin, M. 2021. Online communications by Deniz Hasirci, archived by
DATUMM: Documenting and Archiving Turkish Modern Furniture, http:
linktree/datumm, datumm.org.

DATUMM: Documenting and Archiving Turkish Modern Furniture, http:
linktree/datumm, datumm.org.

Dawkins, R. 1998. Unweaving the Rainbow. London: Houghton Mifflin.

Ekici, S. 2008. Türk Müziği Devlet Konservatuvarlarının Bugünü Üzerine
Düşünceler, “Millî Folklor”, 20: 77.

Hasirci, D., & Tuna Ultav, Z. 2020. “The multiple stories behind the
modern ceramic coffee tables of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey,”
Journal of Design History, 33(3): 225-242.

Hasirci, D., & Tuna Ultav, Z. 2019. “Mid-century modern furniture
representing modern ideals in the grand national assembly of Turkey”,
Journal of Interior Design 45(2): 11-33.

Kamalov, Firuz, David Santandreu Calonge, and Ikhlaas Gurrib. 2023. "New
Era of Artificial Intelligence in Education: Towards a Sustainable
Multifaceted Revolution" Sustainability 15, no. 16: 12451.

Merriam-Webster. An Encyclopædia Britannica Company. 2024.
https://www.merriam-webster.com/. 1.4.2024.

OECD Data. 2024. Young population.
https://data.oecd.org/pop/young-population.htm. Accessed: 4.1.2024.

Postman, N. 1985. Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the
Age of Show Business. USA: Penguin Books.

Tuna Ultav, Z., Hasirci, D., Borvali, S. and Atmaca, H. 2015. DATUMM:
Documenting and Archiving – Turkish Modern Furniture. İzmir: İzmir
University of Economics.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_1]: Ekici, S. (2008). Türk Müziği Devlet Konservatuvarlarının Bugünü
    Üzerine Düşünceler, “Millî Folklor”, 20: 77; Atatürk Kültür, Dil ve
    Tarih Yüksek Kurumu Atatürk Araştırma Merkezi. (2006). 5th ed.
    Arsan, N. Atatürk’ün Söylev ve Demeçleri, Atatürk Kültür, Dil ve
    Tarih Yüksek Kurumu Atatürk Araştırma Merkezi, Atatürk’ün Söylev ve
    Demeçleri, Vol: I, Ankara: Divan Yayıncılık Ltd. Şti.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_2]: Hasirci, D., & Tuna Ultav, Z. (2020). “The multiple stories behind
    the modern ceramic coffee tables of the Grand National Assembly of
    Turkey,” Journal of Design History, 33(3): 225-242; Hasirci, D., &
    Tuna Ultav, Z. (2019). “Mid-century modern furniture representing
    modern ideals in the grand national assembly of Turkey”, Journal of
    Interior Design 45(2): 11-33.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_3]: Ekici, S. (2008). Türk Müziği Devlet Konservatuvarlarının Bugünü
    Üzerine Düşünceler, “Millî Folklor”, 20: 77; Asatekin, M. 2021.
    Online communications by Deniz Hasirci, archived by DATUMM:
    Documenting and Archiving Turkish Modern Furniture, http:
    linktree/datumm, datumm.org.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_4]: Asatekin, M. 2021. Online communications by Deniz Hasirci,
    archived by DATUMM: Documenting and Archiving Turkish Modern
    Furniture, http: linktree/datumm, datumm.org; DATUMM: Documenting
    and Archiving Turkish Modern Furniture, http: linktree/datumm,
    datumm.org; Tuna Ultav, Z., Hasırcı, D., Borvalı, S., & Atmaca, H.
    (2016). DATUMM: Documenting and Archiving Turkish Modern Furniture
    İzmir: İzmir Ekonomi Üniversitesi.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_5]: DATUMM: Documenting and Archiving Turkish Modern Furniture, http:
    linktree/datumm, datumm.org.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_6]: DATUMM: Documenting and Archiving Turkish Modern Furniture, http:
    linktree/datumm, datumm.org.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_7]: Kamalov, Firuz, David Santandreu Calonge, and Ikhlaas Gurrib.
    2023. "New Era of Artificial Intelligence in Education: Towards a
    Sustainable Multifaceted Revolution" Sustainability 15, no. 16:
    12451.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_8]: Postman, N. (1985). Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse
    in the Age of Show Business. USA: Penguin Books.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_9]: Merriam-Webster. An Encyclopædia Britannica Company (2024).
    https://www.merriam-webster.com/. 1.4.2024.

[^0_A1_Hasirci_10]: Dawkins, R. (1998). Unweaving the Rainbow. London: Houghton
    Mifflin.
