---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Design Studies: Context, Content, and Development Paradigm

Şölen Kipöz

Design Studies is a graduate program in which university graduates from
many design disciplines and the creative industries can pursue master's
and doctoral degrees to undertake research with a design focus. This
article is based on my short talk, "Design Studies: The Curriculum of
the Program and its Improvement” in the frame of the symposium called
Design Studies Symposium DSS2023: Realities and Frontiers organized by
Izmir University of Economics Design Studies program coordination in
collaboration with Faculty of Fine Arts and Design.

To start the conversation, let's talk about how the program works
structurally. The majority of graduate education strategies that are
focused on design are built upon the infrastructure for undergraduate
education. Is it possible to build master's and doctoral programs in
design with a distinct academic framework which refers to an academic
organization that is administered autonomously with its own staff,
resources, curriculum, and administration? Many globally renowned
academic institutions with great research credentials devote a different
portion of their research expenditures to graduate education. Allocating
a specialized staff and transforming the outputs of education into
research theses and multi-stakeholder collaborative projects and
publications that address current human and scientific problems appear
as additional values for these institutions. The money for such a system
can come from student tuition fees, scientific breakthroughs, and thesis
research, all of which are financed in the framework of collaboration
between universities and the industry. In order to produce such a
structure at the research-oriented institute level, free from the burden
of undergraduate education, first of all, the legal regulations in the
country where the program is located must be appropriate, and this
independent structure must be supported and promoted by the state or
private sector, and its infrastructure must be established. On the other
hand, considering that an education focusing on the design discipline is
based on the experience and knowledge of the faculties of art, design
and architecture, it is not always possible to make scientific
discoveries that create economic value in these fields to the same
extent as in the fields of science and technology. 

There are numerous examples of independent art and design schools that
are not part of an academic university structure; these include the
Rhodes Island School of Design, Savannah College of Art and Design,
Parsons School of Design in the United States, and the Domus Academy,
Politecnico di Milano in Italy, Royal College of Art, London School of
Design in England, and other schools with master's programs that last
one or two years and have different curricula from their undergraduate
departments. The work of the teachers and students is valued highly in
these schools, and competition prizes, posters, and exhibitions are all
highly regarded. Research universities are places where master's and
doctorate programs are well-known and where research-oriented theses and
dissertations are done for their outputs, which produce knowledge for
research and education disciplines, while the number of practice-based
studies is low.[^1_A2_Kipoz_1]

Continuity and interconnections with the curriculum of undergraduate
university design departments provide the foundation of a master's and
doctoral program in design within the university system. The PhD program
is regarded as a continuation and improved form of the master's degree,
and the master's level is regarded as a continuation and enhanced
version of the bachelor's. All Turkish undergraduate and graduate
programs focused on art and design are affiliated with the Higher
Education Institution. Postgraduate education is associated with
institutes, whereas undergraduate education is associated with academic
faculties and departments. The coordination of graduate and doctoral
education is under the purview of institutes, which are distinct
academic divisions within institutions. However, as the individual
academic units are responsible for creating the content, their staff
members conduct the training. The students are the changing actors in
this scenario; they are frequently graduates of the relevant faculty's
undergraduate program; that is, they complete their thesis work and
postgraduate coursework with the same faculty members they studied under
during their undergraduate studies. The courses will probably cover the
academic expertise of the faculty members they studied under. Without
independent staff, resources, or funding, graduate education is provided
inside the University's centralized organizational framework. Most
students are young individuals who are studying or hope to pursue a
career in academia. 

## IUE Design Studies Program Content and Structure

The Design Studies program, founded by the academic staff of the Izmir
University of Economics Faculty of Fine Arts and Design, differs from
similar programs in Turkey due to its interdisciplinary character.
 Although the program has an administrative structure affiliated with
the Institute of Graduate School of the University as per the statute,
the functioning and content coordination are carried out by the faculty.
In this program, students enrolled in the program from design and other
creative industries as well as from the positive and human sciences
receive a mixed education with faculty members from different
disciplines and areas of expertise. They graduate with a master's thesis
prepared in accordance with academic standards in a period of two and a
half years. The first thesis completed within the program was completed
in 2008. While approximately two to six theses are completed each year,
the number of theses completed in 2021 increased to nine. The doctoral
program was later added to the graduate program structure of design
studies, and the first dissertation of the PhD program was completed in
2019 in the field of waste management and circular design strategies in
the fashion industry. In 2021, a second dissertation is completed on
marine culture and service design. In the following years, the number of
theses increased slowly, with two theses on bio-design and participatory
design in 2022, a theoretical thesis on the relationship between
literature and clothing in 2023, and two different theses on urban
branding and culinary culture. There are currently 22 doctoral studies
in progress; apart from design history, ideology and cultural studies,
thesis topics that stand out in line with current design paradigms are
sustainable and circular design, bio-mimetics, biophilic design,
bio-design, smart design with digitalization, digitalization in
production, consumption and augmented reality, well-being and somatic
design, slow design, participatory design.

The program's course curriculum and instructional framework are mostly
theoretical in nature, drawing from design-oriented, multidisciplinary
conceptual readings. Exceptionally, as part of the Ethics and Social
Responsibility in Design course delivered since 2011, which has been
offered as an elective for the past five years, an end-of-semester
activist project has been developed and exhibited. In order to construct
a conceptual idea, the Design Studio course has been a compulsory course
since 2016. Classes for professionalized students from various fields
are held in the evenings on weekdays in the master's program, but the
doctoral program primarily targets those who have started or are
planning to start their academic career.

While doing research, PhD applicants have begun to instruct
undergraduate courses. A PhD is now required to become a faculty member,
as it is currently the case in many globally recognized research
universities. Apart from the academic title, this calls for knowledge of
the nature of scientific research and the ethics of academic
scholarship, appropriate referencing, familiarity with the background
and body of publications in the field, and comprehension of the
appropriate formats for proposals, discussions, and presentations in the
research domain.[^1_A2_Kipoz_2] In this case, to become a PhD candidate after
completing their master's degree, an academic applicant must pass the
proficiency exam in the IUE Design Studies program and demonstrate their
ability to conduct original research in this discipline. 

The curriculum increasingly emphasizes elective courses, while research
methods and seminar courses are positioned as common and compulsory
courses. The elective courses in the master's elective course pool are
designed to provide students with the opportunity to explore specific
areas of interest within the field of design studies. These courses
allow students to delve deeper into topics such as sustainable design,
design theory, art, design, urban and spatial relations, artistic
practices, design research methods, and material science. 

At the doctoral level, in addition to the compulsory courses on design
research and the relationship between design, art, culture, and history,
the elective courses consist of interdisciplinary theoretical readings
on the relationship between design, art, science, and technology and
semi-practical courses focusing on smart design and textile arts. While
the availability of instructors with the expertise to teach the courses
determines the opening and selection process of the courses, it is
possible to observe that some of the courses and instructors are
effective in shaping the thesis topics of doctoral candidates.

The program's founding years saw a significant focus on design history,
design education, design discourses, and design methods for master's
theses. Meanwhile, prominent topics for master's thesis included social
design, collaborative design, inclusive design, sustainable and ethical
design, design management, the relationship between design and
technology, bio-design, well-being, smart design, post-human design and
design with AI. While students adhere to the current design paradigms
when choosing their thesis topics, other considerations, such as the
suitability of the faculty's specialized members for the subjects that
interest them and their compatibility with the thesis professor they
wish to work with, take precedence. Naturally, it is advantageous that
thesis students and thesis advisors get along well, collaborate well,
and allow thesis students to focus on the issues they choose for their
thesis. On the other hand, it is crucial to consider how helpful these
are, where they are used, and how much they challenge the status quo in
design. All of these are, of course, preserved in university archives as
well as library archives. However, assessing the external influence will
also be helpful in determining their impact; an intriguing study on this
topic from a while ago yielded data; 22% of the theses were finished
without sharing the findings; 29% were presented at conferences; 17%
were published as books; and 4% were shared online.[^1_A2_Kipoz_3]

It takes extra work to locate a postgraduate research space in the
design industry and in the working world, or to work with local and
non-governmental groups. Theses that involve various partnerships,
fieldwork, workshops, and projects outside of academic institutions must
set up the foundation for working with these organizations and
communities while adhering to ethical committee regulations and
protocol. Without a doubt, the industrial collaboration framework makes
it more challenging to assess theses on design history, theory, and
critique. 

## The Future Paradigm for Design Studies

At the initial stage of content development of the Design Studies
program (2004), as in the rest of the world, design-oriented research
problems or design innovation were object-oriented.[^1_A2_Kipoz_4] Over time,
design began to be perceived as an innovation focused on service and
knowledge production rather than an object-oriented mechanical
phenomenon. The role of globalization, the information age, and the
internet was undoubtedly evident in this. On the other hand, the
interaction of design with social issues has led to the emergence of an
understanding of design that cannot be defined by physical and
geographical boundaries in a world that has turned into a global
village, in Marshall McLuhan's words, design has evolved from being for
people to being with people. The fact that "design problems" as we know
them are not only related to design, or the possibility of solving
problems not in the closed world of design itself, but through
multi-actor, multi-stakeholder, and multi-disciplinary team play, has
necessitated the development of an interdisciplinary design paradigm.
When we look at how the interdisciplinary research process goes within
the dissertation and the research process, we observe that more and more
doctoral students come together with experts from different disciplines
in the thesis monitoring committees. On the other hand, the majority of
students prefer to work with advisors who are familiar with their field
of study. Barriers caused by compartmentalization and recognition of the
teaching staff as well as the PhD candidate--most likely working as a
research assistant within the discipline--are significant. The
challenges of Coordinating faculty teaching loads, student enrollments,
and financial issues[^1_A2_Kipoz_5] along with assigning co-advisors or
collaborating with other faculties and universities need to be overcome.

Collaboration works in different levels; the traditional “lone scholar”
model of academia replaced by the ‘hybrid academic’ who embodies the
collaborative space between sectors and disciplines.[^1_A2_Kipoz_6] We see that the
role of the academic is transformed, just as the roles of the designer
intersect between science, art, ecology, and social sciences. An
emerging ‘hybrid academic’ is not just inquisitive enough to do
research, or able to write, but someone who is entrepreneurial,
scientific explorer, artist who is connected with the real world and the
industry. By crossing the boundaries between industry and academia “the
agile academic “who transcends the ivory tower, adopts a practice based
innovative research, engaging in real-world problems and contexts.[^1_A2_Kipoz_7]
In regards to industrial collaborations within graduate studies academic
priorities are expected to align with industrial expectations. There is
a transition from an industrial understanding seeing the benefits of
such collaboration as a recruitment strategy for future employees, or as
philanthropic gesture[^1_A2_Kipoz_8] to a professional mindset that sees the
research as a process of mutual learning and collaborative development.
On the other hand, there are still shortcomings, in the context of such
collaboration in Turkey, in terms of investment in research, both by the
industry and academia.

Definitions of research within graduate studies vary; for some it refers
to principles and more objective findings, for others it means
subjective opinion. Anyway, research asks questions, selects appropriate
methods, tests the questions, analyzes the results, and disseminates the
conclusions unambiguously.[^1_A2_Kipoz_9] Design research, on the other hand, is an
ideal context for embedding both practical and academic aspects of
methodology, and as design practice has parallels with the more academic
philosophical approaches, it requires an alignment of theory and
practice.[^1_A2_Kipoz_10] Design research remains a controversial matter, a
technical rationality has been challenged and importance was given to
artistic, intuitive processes which practitioners bring to situations of
uncertainty, instability, uniqueness and value conflict.[^1_A2_Kipoz_11] In terms
of the interest in finding solutions to interdisciplinary problems faced
by the current design paradigm, the question of the nature of academic
research and the fact that doctoral research is evolving in an
increasingly practice-based structure raises the question of whether the
thesis question is "worth doing research on." In this context, a
definition of research emerges as “systemic inquiry for new knowledge”
and “the implementation of credible and systematic modes of inquiry” by
Australian Institute of Architects (2004).[^1_A2_Kipoz_12]

To conclude, the program's multidisciplinary nature is gradually
evolving into a transdisciplinary one as a result of the need for
academic instruction to address contemporary socioeconomic, cultural,
social, technological and environmental issues. In this context, the
global climate crisis, for instance, is a transdisciplinary issue that
manifests at every social, economic, and industrial layer, requiring
attention from a multi-actor field of knowledge and experience that
includes industry, civil society, universities, local governments etc.
The construction of an autonomous academic structure that prioritizes
and supports value creation and the impact of the research will be
inevitable for the sustainability of post-graduate academic programs.

## References

Davis, M. (2008). Why do we Need Doctoral Study in Design?
*International Journal of Design*, 2(3). p.71-79.

Durling, D (2002). Discourses on Research and PhD in Design. *Quality
Assurance in Education,* Volume 10. Number 2. p.81.

Joshi, A (2010). “Why Designers Do a PhD?” [IHCI'10: Proceedings of the
2010 International Conference on Interaction Design & International
Development](https://dl.acm.org/doi/proceedings/10.5555/2227347). March
2010. p.1.

Meyer, M.W., Norman, D (2019). Changing Design Education for the 21st
Century. [*http://doi.org10.10.16/j.sheji.2019.12.002*
p.24](about:blank), p.42.

Murphy, E., Jacobs, N (2014). “Designing a New Design PhD?” 19th DMI
Academic Design Management Conference: Design Management in the Era of
Disruption, London, September 2014.p.3, 6, 11

[]{#_heading=h.gjdgxs .anchor}

[^1_A2_Kipoz_1]: Meyer, M.W., Norman, D (2019). Changing Design Education for the
    21st Century. [*http://doi.org10.10.16/j.sheji.2019.12.002*
    p.24](about:blank), p.42.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_2]: Meyer, M.W., Norman, D (2019). Changing Design Education for the
    21st Century. [*http://doi.org10.10.16/j.sheji.2019.12.002*
    p.24](about:blank), p.42.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_3]: Davis, M. (2008). Why do we Need Doctoral Study in Design?
    *International Journal of Design*, 2(3). p.71-79.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_4]: Davis, M. (2008). Why do we Need Doctoral Study in Design?
    *International Journal of Design*, 2(3). p.71-79.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_5]: Davis, M. (2008). Why do we Need Doctoral Study in Design?
    *International Journal of Design*, 2(3). p.71-79.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_6]: Murphy, E., Jacobs, N (2014). “Designing a New Design PhD?” 19th
    DMI Academic Design Management Conference: Design Management in the
    Era of Disruption, London, September 2014.p.3, 6, 11.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_7]: Murphy, E., Jacobs, N (2014). “Designing a New Design PhD?” 19th
    DMI Academic Design Management Conference: Design Management in the
    Era of Disruption, London, September 2014. p.3, 6, 11.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_8]: Davis, M. (2008). Why do we Need Doctoral Study in Design?
    *International Journal of Design*, 2(3). p.71-79

[^1_A2_Kipoz_9]: Durling, D (2002). Discourses on Research and PhD in Design.
    *Quality Assurance in Education,* Volume 10. Number 2. p. 81.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_10]: Murphy, E., Jacobs, N (2014). “Designing a New Design PhD?” 19th
    DMI Academic Design Management Conference: Design Management in the
    Era of Disruption, London, September 2014. p.3, 6, 11.

[^1_A2_Kipoz_11]: Joshi, A (2010). “Why Designers Do a PhD?” [IHCI'10: Proceedings
    of the 2010 International Conference on Interaction Design &
    International
    Development](https://dl.acm.org/doi/proceedings/10.5555/2227347).
    March 2010. p.1

[^1_A2_Kipoz_12]: Davis, M. (2008). Why do we Need Doctoral Study in Design?
    *International Journal of Design*, 2(3). p. 71-79.
