---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Why Design Studies? What Makes/Should Make Us Unique Today?

Özgül Kılınçarslan

## Introduction: The Interdisciplinary Approach and The Essence of Uniqueness

In response to the thought-provoking question posed by the Design
Studies Symposium DSS2023[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_1] committee, themed "Realities and
Frontiers," I embarked on an ontological journey. This journey began as
a preparation for my presentation, where I contemplated the Symposium's
diverse audience, the participating experts, the venue's significance,
and the event's duration. This article serves as an extension of that
talk, aiming to delve deeper into the core question: "Why Design
Studies? What makes/should make us unique today?"

During the preparation phase, I was particularly inspired by a dialogue
between two accomplished designers: brand designer and illustrator Micah
Bowers and UX designer and lead editor of a design blog, Miklos Philips.
Their discussion on the interplay between design and art[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_2] set the
foundation for my exploration. My approach in this article is to extend
the conversation from design to a broader artistic context, thereby
making it relevant to contemporary discussions on creativity. The
exploration of this wider context will guide us in evaluating the
present-day requirements of graphic design and user experience design
(UX). This analysis seeks to uncover how the concepts of design and art
not only intersect but also influence each other in the modern era.
Furthermore, it will assess the current and future dynamics of these
creative fields, particularly considering new technological advancements
and the growing applications of artificial intelligence.

A pivotal element of my approach is to trace and interpret thought
pathways, exploring how contrasting ideas can coalesce to provide
enlightening insights and aiming to systematize these findings. This
exploration involves understanding the importance of Design Studies,
defining the essence of uniqueness in our times, and discussing how such
uniqueness can be attained. However, due to the impossibility of
detailing the relationship between all these fields within the limits of
this text, it points to certain reference points and leaves the further
reading and analyses to the reader.

Reflecting on what it means to be unique today, my thoughts turned to
the contrasting yet insightful critiques of modernity by two eminent
20th-century thinkers, Walter Benjamin and Martin Heidegger. Benjamin,
in his 1935 essay "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction," discusses the concept of "aura," epitomizing uniqueness.
This concept leads to debates usually found in art history and art
philosophy. Benjamin argues that the aura of art is compromised in an
age of mechanical reproduction, suggesting that art production, in a
time lacking traditional and ritualistic values, is inevitably connected
to political praxis. Similarly, Martin Heidegger, in the same year and
unbeknownst to Benjamin[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_3], gave a lecture titled 'The Origin of the
Work of Art' at the Kunstwissenschaftliche Gesellschaft in Freiburg,
presenting a contrasting viewpoint.

This exploration into the philosophical underpinnings of art's "aura"
through the lens of Benjamin and Heidegger provides a profound
understanding of how art, in its essence and representation, is
intertwined with broader socio-political contexts and ideologies. The
juxtaposition of these two philosophical standpoints offers a rich
tapestry of insights into the evolving nature of art and its impact on
society and culture, particularly in the context of modernity and its
challenges. This in-depth analysis not only deepens our comprehension of
the philosophical dimensions of art but also illuminates the potential
pathways for the future discourse of Design Studies, especially in an
era where the intersection of technology, art, and politics is
increasingly prominent.

## The Dual Impact of Technology on Art and Design

The emphasis on 'today' in the question 'What makes/should make us
unique today?' redirects me to Benjamin’s essay. In its introduction,
Benjamin quotes Paul Valéry: 'For over twenty years now, neither matter,
space, nor time have been what they used to be. We must be prepared for
the fact that such great innovations will transform the technique of the
arts, directly affect inventiveness, and ultimately, perhaps in the most
magical way, alter the very concept of art itself.'[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_4] When recalling
the early 20th century, marked by the introduction of new tools like
photography and then cinema, these technological innovations changed the
tools, language, and consequently the meaning of art. Today, this
suggests the applications of artificial intelligence (AI) in the fields
of art and design. The impact of changing technology on art and design
can be assessed using branches of philosophy such as aesthetics and
ethics.

Hubert Dreyfus, a philosopher deeply engaged in artificial intelligence
research, articulated his philosophical analyses in the 1960s, drawing
intellectual influence from Martin Heidegger and Maurice Merleau-Ponty.
Merleau-Ponty's focus on perception and embodiment throughout his career
provided a foundation to explore the relationship between mind and body,
the objective world and the experienced world, as well as the expression
in language and art, including considerations of history, politics, and
nature. The title of the prologue section of the book "Mind over
Machine" poetically encapsulates H. Dreyfus's philosophical discourses
on knowledge: "The heart has its reasons that reason does not know".[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_5]
Dreyfus's seminal work in the philosophy of mind is characterized by his
firm assertion that the body is fundamental to all aspects of
intelligent life. This stance challenges the formalist notion of a
purely algorithmic, disembodied mind. Dreyfus argues that human
intelligence and expertise extend beyond conscious symbolic
manipulation, being deeply rooted in unconscious processes. He posits
that these unconscious skills are elusive to formal rules, providing a
critical perspective on the development of artificial intelligence. In
his book “What Computers Still Can’t Do,” Dreyfus highlights the
inherent limitations of artificial intelligence and the impracticality
of total formalization. He maintains that human capabilities, interwoven
with various types of human behavior, defy complete programmability. In
"Alchemy and AI"[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_6] and "What Computers Can't Do"[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_7], Dreyfus
encapsulates the history of artificial intelligence, critiques its
progression based on flawed assumptions, and challenges the prevailing
optimism in the field. Hubert Dreyfus's philosophical analyses gained an
interdisciplinary dimension through his collaboration with his brother
Stuart Dreyfus, who was significantly involved in numerous projects in
computer science, mathematics, and artificial intelligence at MIT and
the Rand Corporation. In today's world, where disciplinary boundaries
are increasingly interwoven, adopting a collaborative approach to art,
design, and philosophy, both in practice and theory, has become
indispensable.

In the current landscape, artworks or design applications produced by
AI, when isolated from the rich contexts of history and philosophy,
often appear oversimplified yet striking. Looking ahead, we can
anticipate these tools becoming increasingly adept at facilitating form
generation. The ascendancy of AI tools is a central point of
contemporary debate, sparking both intrigue and concern about their
potential to supplant art producers and design practitioners.
Recognizing artists and designers as cultural producers underlines the
need for transformative changes in art and design education. This
imperative mirrors our collective decisions regarding the type of world
we aspire to shape and inhabit.

Given the interdisciplinary nature of the Design Studies program and the
opportunities it presents for exploring design theories, what can we
discern about the evolution of art and design in the context of today’s
technological capabilities? On one hand, we can examine the burgeoning
field of biodesign, driven by sustainability and environmental crises.
On the other hand, we can explore the transformative changes in design
brought about by emerging tools like Augmented Reality (AR), Virtual
Reality (VR), and artificial intelligence applications. My short talk,
originating from the concept of "Aura" as discussed by Benjamin and the
pursuit of uniqueness, aims to assess both the positive and negative
impacts of these technological tools on design products and
environments. In our quest to define the uniqueness of Design Studies
today, it is crucial to incorporate the ethical dimension of design
alongside the trajectories of history and philosophy. Therefore, I
advocate for an approach that initially revisits the milestones of
modernist and postmodernist thought, placing them within a broader
context. This reflective journey through the intersections of
philosophy, technology, and design not only enriches our understanding
of the dynamic nature of design but also underscores the need for a
comprehensive, ethically informed perspective when navigating the
challenges and opportunities presented by technological advancements in
the fields of art and design. By integrating these diverse strands of
thought, we are better positioned to address the complex question of
what defines the uniqueness of Design Studies in today’s landscape.

We often observe artifacts and products of the past floating in a visual
landscape, disconnected from their historical context and discourse.
Younger generations, typically unaware of this historical background,
may perceive criticism of this landscape by older generations in an
overly conservative tone. This may be due to the fact that previous
generations often criticized AI applications without experiencing
today's tools, and that younger generations are swimming in a sea of
similar, ordinary, sometimes incomplete, pastiche-like images that they
have not encountered better examples of. Therefore, listening more
carefully to the thinkers of modernity and postmodernism, as well as the
artists and designers of these periods, becomes essential for all
generations today.

Recalling Benjamin’s thesis on history, inspired by Paul Klee’s painting
(Angelus Novus), we should also consider the horrified expression of the
“angel of history” being swept into ruins. It is crucial to impart the
progressive approach of modernity, the impacts of the First and Second
World Wars, and the trajectories of art philosophy and history to
younger generations. In today's cultural landscape, where images drawn
from a dataset and interconnected create meaning that is often subjected
to randomness from the outset, there is a need to reassess the
artwork-centered analyses of Benjamin and Heidegger in the context of
the present. Such a reassessment may require us to reposition the role
of the artist and the designer in contemporary society.

## Repositioning Graphic Design: From Electronic Publishing to Artificial Intelligence

The widespread adoption of electronic publishing since the late 1980s,
along with multimedia, web, and social media, has influenced graphic
design. The advantages and disadvantages of computer-assisted graphic
design and electronic publishing sparked much debate related with
creativity in the 1980s and 1990s. Today, the use of artificial
intelligence in graphic design software has enabled the automation of
many design tasks, posing a risk of de-skilling the profession. This
development, particularly in areas focused on rapid production and
functional design, could lead to a division between professional and
'non-professional' designers. Research at the intersection of AI and
graphic design is predominantly conducted by computer scientists rather
than designers. This has resulted in a more functional approach in
AI-enabled design software, rather than a pursuit of creative design.
The evolving dynamics between AI and graphic design not only reshape the
landscape of design but also raise fundamental questions about the
future role and skill set of the designer. As AI continues to permeate
the tools and methodologies of design, a critical examination of its
impact on creativity, originality, and the essence of design becomes
imperative. This interplay between technology and creativity underscores
the need for a thoughtful integration of AI in design practices,
ensuring that these tools enhance rather than diminish the intrinsic
value and human touch in design.

Currently, the implementation of artificial intelligence features in
graphic design software has automated many design processes. However,
this situation has led to the devaluation of the graphic design
profession, the creation of a second layer consisting of
non-professional designers, and the filling of today's visual culture
space with less creative works. This imposes a responsibility for more
active participation in AI and design on both design practitioners and
researchers. Meron[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_8] suggests that hybrid intelligence approaches
could offer new opportunities in this field, referring to specific
studies in 2019 and 2020.

In his work "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction,"
Walter Benjamin focuses on the transformation of traditional art in the
20th century and how this change diverges from traditional ideas. He
attributes this largely to the reproduction of art and sees it as a
negative change because it lacks the elements of "presence in time and
space" and "unique existence," synonymous with the concept of aura. This
brings us back to the issue of uniqueness and singularity. Explaining
his ideas about the future of art, Benjamin, while describing an artwork
devoid of the potter's handprint, opens a discussion that extends to
today's AI debates about the human touch. The concerns he expressed in
his time about modern technologies can still guide us today. Looking at
the instances since the 19th century where machines have replaced
humans, we can better assess the changes in the working world. I believe
that instead of outright rejecting these technologies, experiencing them
firsthand and critiquing them from within is a significant
responsibility for art producers and design practitioners, as they can
complement but never fully replace human creativity.

Art producers and design practitioners, when using the same tools and
data inputs, can easily create homogenized designs that appear generic.
Indeed, the cheapening of art and easy access to design products can be
seen as a form of democratization. However, this issue needs to be
re-evaluated considering Fredric Jameson's cultural analyses. When we
consider artists and designers, and now curators as cultural producers,
paying closer attention to the dynamics of rapid production and
consumption becomes an intellectual responsibility. Unfortunately, when
considering the casualties in sectors such as education, which are
foundational to society, the failure to recognize this intellectual
responsibility leads to the training of culture producers who merely
create form and product, deepening the problematic structures of
modernism in a world of postmodern proliferation. The contemporary art
environment has been significantly affected by the advent of graphic
design and photography software, leading to a high perception of
ordinariness in many art products and their rapid consumption. On one
hand, professional graphic design applications like InDesign and
Illustrator continue to be complex and challenging for beginners and
non-professionals. On the other hand, easily accessible online graphic
design tools like Canva and Adobe's Spark, as well as AI-powered image
creation applications like Dall-E and Midjourney, remind us of the
statements by Marcel Duchamp and Joseph Beuys. In a world where the idea
is art and everyone can be an artist, why shouldn't everyone design
their invitations, posters, social media posts, and even, as we will
encounter more frequently in the near future, their own applications and
games? These user-friendly platforms, often supported by artificial
intelligence and machine production technology, primarily offer
template-focused creative tools. While democratizing design by making it
more accessible, they contribute to the homogenization of design
aesthetics and techniques, potentially leading to a saturation of
similar, less innovative art works in the contemporary art environment.
The dilemma within these new tools of art and design reflects a broader
trend observed in the contemporary art world over the last twenty years;
the ease of creating and disseminating art provided by technology
sometimes comes at the expense of depth and originality.

Gradually, designers have critically assessed the situation arising from
the advancement of computer-aided graphic design technologies since the
second decade of the twenty-first century.[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_9] The development of
graphic design technologies towards the end of the twentieth century
facilitated the growth of in-house graphic design departments and the
emergence of rapid, utilitarian, and less creative design products. In
the 1960s, when the boundary between art and design began to blur, the
works and discourses of Andy Warhol can offer a different perspective on
today's debates. However, we often miss what these and similar works,
reduced to formal analysis in art history classes, tell us about our
cultural world. As many contemporary artists and designers eclectically
use styles from the past without a grounding in art philosophy, as we
enter the third decade of the twenty-first century, we have both too
much and too little idea of what art and design are today.

Disengaged from creativity, producing quick sectoral
solutions[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_10]^,^[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_11] an interdisciplinary field of art and design will
inevitably blur the landscape we call culture, a form and result of our
experiences. Accepting the challenges of interdisciplinarity and
adopting and adapting methodologies specific to art and design practice
can facilitate the preservation and defense of their creative,
conceptual, and responsive aspects. We can comfortably say, looking at
the last twenty years of cultural landscape, that the appeal of
machine-generated solutions across different sectors has led to the
emergence of more predictable, template-based, and less creative works
and products. However, the integration of artificial intelligence into
art and design processes offers advantages for professionals. With
AI-supported tools, artists and designers can automate repetitive tasks
like resizing images or creating layouts, allowing more time for their
creative aspects. The integration of artificial intelligence into art
and design processes has facilitated production for professionals. But
at the same time, it has led to a detachment from embodied knowledge. AI
algorithms can analyze large amounts of data, enabling designers to make
informed decisions based on user preferences and trends. Moreover, AI
can assist designers in creating personalized experiences for users. AI
systems, using machine learning algorithms, can understand user behavior
patterns and adapt designs accordingly. This level of personalization
increases user engagement and satisfaction. However, this acceleration,
while serving as an assistant for professional artists and designers and
reducing production costs, also leads to the indiscriminate distribution
of outputs, detached from critical context and assessment, thus creating
confusion at times. The outcomes added to our cultural landscape by
design outputs and environments quickly produced for non-professional
purposes and sectoral solutions with the support of AI, hint that we
need to assess this situation not just as an aesthetic issue, but also
as an ethical one.

## The Ethical Implications of AI in Design: A Call for Responsible Innovation

Modern AI tools currently offer limited freedom for art producers and
design practitioners to influence the direction of their work, resulting
in outcomes that lack human touch and experiential depth. While it is
currently challenging to express personal style or discourse in works
produced by AI tools, this situation may evolve in the future. This
optimistic view hinges on the hope that both artists and designers will
pay close attention to ethics-one of the oldest sub-disciplines of
philosophy-and act in accordance with the interdisciplinary perspective
that we have both forgotten and rediscovered through new tools. Whether
we engage with the Heideggerian problematic of knowledge, exploring
fundamental philosophical ideas, or delve into the Benjaminian
postmodern phenomena inherent in modernity, understanding the present
and developing products and media requires us to go beyond formal
solutions. We must venture into the forking paths of the garden of human
nature.

In the field of industrial design, where my understanding of design
history is less extensive compared to graphic design, I believe it is
the collective responsibility of those who produce and consume culture
to advocate for responsible innovation. The relatively new approaches of
user experience design, participatory design and co-design can deepen
and develop the ethical dimension. However, taking into account
practical conditions, it is necessary to re-evaluate the concepts of
human desire and need in today's context for potential deviations.
Recognizing AI as a strategically important technology with societal and
economic benefits, we must also acknowledge the serious risks,
challenges, and unintended consequences it poses. In designing AI
products and services, we should not solely burden the younger
generations with the responsibility, but open historical examples and
the trajectories of philosophical thought for discussion. The complexity
of AI applications creates difficulties in developing and applying
criteria for assessing ethical and legal principles. The societal impact
of AI depends on both the technology and the goals of the system, and
how they are embedded in an organization.[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_12]

Ethics by Design (EbD)[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_13] represents a systematic methodology for
integrating ethical considerations into technological development,
particularly AI. Originating from European research in computer science,
ethics, and responsible innovation, EbD has evolved from the concept of
"privacy by design." This approach gained momentum in Europe following a
2019 European Parliament resolution advocating for inherent ethics in AI
models. By 2020, despite recognition in academia and policy, a
comprehensive EbD methodology for AI had not yet been fully developed.
The SHERPA and SIENNA projects, under the European Commission, aimed to
establish a robust EbD framework for AI. [^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_14]

## Ethical Framework for AI Design: Core Values and Design Requirements

Adapting ethical principles to AI applications is challenging due to
their abstract nature. Fundamental ethical issues like explainability,
fairness, privacy, and accountability lie at the heart of AI
applications and debates. Broader ethical issues can be addressed
through conceptual frameworks, guidelines, or process models.[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_15]

I will briefly outline the main items in Brey & Dainow's research
framework for the EbD framework for AI:

-   *Human Agency:* Respects human rights such as freedom, autonomy,
    dignity. Prohibits AI from making final decisions on personal/moral
    issues and from manipulating or creating addiction.

-   *Privacy and Data Governance:* Ensures data subject rights during
    personal data processing. Supports data quality, accuracy, and
    rights, including consent withdrawal.

-   *Fairness:* Avoids algorithmic bias and supports diversity and
    inclusion. Ensures AI accessibility and avoids negative social
    impacts.

-   *Individual, Social, and Environmental Well-being:* Prioritizes
    safety, health, and psychological well-being. Considers
    environmental sustainability and societal quality.

-   *Transparency:* Requires clear communication about AI interactions
    and decisions. Supports auditability and explainability of AI
    decisions and operations.

-   *Accountability and Oversight:* Includes human oversight in AI
    operations and decision-making. Involves risk assessment and
    independent third-party auditing.

## 

## Conclusion: Navigating the New Realities and Frontiers of Design Studies

As our exploration draws to a close, inspired by the pivotal question
from the Design Studies Symposium DSS2023, "Why Design Studies? What
makes/should make us unique today?", we stand at a significant
crossroads. This journey, spanning design, art, and technology, leads us
to a critical reevaluation of design in the era of artificial
intelligence, marking new realities and frontiers. Stimulated by the
dialogue between Micah Bowers and Miklos Philips, our discussion
expanded from design to a broader artistic context, aiming to comprehend
the evolving dynamics of these fields under the transformative influence
of technology.

Our discourse, enriched by Walter Benjamin's perspectives on the 'aura'
of art and Martin Heidegger's contrasting views, provided a
philosophical foundation that underscored the intricate connections
between art, design, and their socio-political contexts. This interplay
highlighted the transformative impact of technology, especially AI, on
art and design, reshaping their tools, language, and inherent meanings,
thereby altering the very fabric of creativity and expression.

In this technological landscape, philosopher Hubert Dreyfus's skepticism
towards AI's ability to replicate human intelligence and creativity
becomes particularly pronounced. Dreyfus highlights the limitations of
AI, focusing on the depth of human experience and expertise that
computational algorithms cannot adequately capture. His philosophy
delves into the realms of practical and embodied intelligence, shedding
light on the non-formalizable aspects of human skill and intuition. He
asserts that human expertise, particularly in creative fields like art
and design or in any action honed over time, is deeply rooted in
practical and embodied intelligence and therefore surpasses the
capacities of artificial intelligence. At this intersection, Heidegger’s
and Ponty’s insights into the essence of truth and knowledge in art
converge with Dreyfus’s critical perspectives on AI. This convergence
crafts a narrative that acknowledges technology's transformative role in
art and design while cautioning against overlooking the intrinsic human
qualities that define these creative fields. This philosophical
framework guides our understanding of the complexities of integrating AI
into art and design, emphasizing the need to preserve the fundamental
human elements in these disciplines.

As we venture into these emerging frontiers, the ethical implications of
AI in design prompt a more holistic perspective that embraces human
needs and our environmental responsibilities. The Ethics by Design
framework, concentrating on ethical considerations in AI, now also
stresses the interconnectedness of humans with their environment. This
paradigm shift involves not just the implementation of principles but
also a re-envisioning of our role in a world where human and
environmental concerns are deeply interwoven. In this era, design
evolves into a domain where technology, creativity, and ecological
consciousness merge. This intersection demands a profound engagement
with ethical dimensions, ensuring that AI's integration into design
promotes a harmonious relationship between humans and their environment,
enhancing creativity and nurturing our planet.

In conclusion, the essence of Design Studies today is defined by its
adaptive nature amidst technological and ecological transformations.
Embracing a commitment to ethical responsibility that encompasses
respect for our interconnected world, our explorations in philosophy,
technology, and design emphasize the necessity for a comprehensive,
ethically informed, and ecologically aware perspective. Moving forward,
Design Studies is well-positioned to lead in navigating these new
realities and frontiers, evolving in an era of transformative change,
and ensuring that the progression of design remains responsive to human
needs as well as the health and well-being of our planet and its
ecosystems.

## References

Benjamin, W. (2004). Pasajlar, Çev. A. Cemal, Yapı Kredi Yayınları,
İstanbul.

Brey, P., Dainow, B. (2023). Ethics by design for artificial
intelligence. *AI Ethics*.
[*https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00330-4*](https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00330-4)

Drucker, J., McVarish, E. (2013). Graphic Design History A Critical
Guide. Pearson, New Jersey.

Duggan, B. (2013). The Rise of the In-House Agency. A. o. N.
Advertisers.

Dreyfus, Hubert (1965), Alchemy and AI, RAND Corporation.
<https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Hubert_Dreyfus's_views_on_artificial_intelligence#CITEREFDreyfus1965>

Dreyfus, H. L. (1972). What Computers Still Can’t Do: A Critique of
Artificial Reason. The MIT Press, Cambridge Massachusetts, London,
England.

Dreyfus, H.L., Dreyfus, S.E., Athanasiou, T. (1986). Mind over machine.
Free Press, New York, NY.

Exploring ways to regulate and build trust in AI (2023). A project
report in the RAND Europe's annual review 2022 -2023.
<https://www.rand.org/randeurope/research/projects/exploring-ways-to-regulate-and-build-trust-in-artificial-intelli.html>

Heidegger, M. (2014). Sanat Eserinin Kökeni, Çev. F. Tepebaşılı. De Ki
Basım, Ankara.

Long, C. P. (2001). Art’s Fateful Hour: Benjamin, Heidegger, Art and
Politics. *New German Critique,* 83, 89–115.
[*https://doi.org/10.2307/827790*](https://doi.org/10.2307/827790)

Meron, Y. (2022). Graphic design and artificial intelligence:
Interdisciplinary challenges for designers in the search for research
collaboration, in Lockton, D., Lenzi, S., Hekkert, P., Oak, A., Sádaba,
J., Lloyd, P. (eds.), DRS2022: Bilbao, 25 June - 3 July, Bilbao, Spain.
[*https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2022.157*](https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2022.157)

Philips, M., Bowers, M. (2018). Art vs Design – A Timeless Debate.
<https://www.toptal.com/designers/creative-direction/art-vs-design>

Prem, E. (2023) From ethical AI frameworks to tools: a review of
approaches. *AI Ethics*, 3, 699–716.
[*https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00258-9*](https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00258-9)

Silk, A. J., & Stiglin, M. M. (2016). Build It, Buy It Or Both?
Rethinking the Sourcing of Advertising Services. *International Journal
of Marketing Studies,* 8(1), p.1-13.

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_1]: Design Studies Symposium DSS2023: Realities and Frontiers
    organized by Izmir University of Economics Design Studies program
    coordination in collaboration with Faculty of Fine Arts and Design.

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_2]: Philips, M., Bowers, M. (2018). Art vs Design – A Timeless Debate.
    https://www.toptal.com/designers/creative-direction/art-vs-design

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_3]: Long, C. P. (2001). Art’s Fateful Hour: Benjamin, Heidegger, Art
    and Politics. New German Critique, 83, 89–115.
    https://doi.org/10.2307/827790

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_4]: Benjamin, W. (2004). Pasajlar, Çev. A. Cemal, Yapı Kredi
    Yayınları, İstanbul.

    Brey, P., Dainow, B. (2023). Ethics by design for artificial
    intelligence. AI Ethics. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00330-4

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_5]: Dreyfus, H.L., Dreyfus, S.E., Athanasiou, T. (1986). Mind over
    machine. Free Press, New York, NY

    Exploring ways to regulate and build trust in AI,(2023). a project
    report in the RAND Europe's annual review 2022 -2023.

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_6]: Dreyfus, Hubert (1965), Alchemy and AI, RAND Corporation.
    https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Hubert\_Dreyfus's\_views\_on\_artificial\_intelligence\#CITEREFDreyfus1965

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_7]: Dreyfus, H.L., Dreyfus, S.E., Athanasiou, T. (1986). Mind over
    machine. Free Press, New York, NY

    Exploring ways to regulate and build trust in AI,(2023). a project
    report in the RAND Europe's annual review 2022 -2023.

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_8]: Meron, Y. (2022). Graphic design and artificial intelligence:
    Interdisciplinary challenges for designers in the search for
    research collaboration, in Lockton, D., Lenzi, S., Hekkert, P., Oak,
    A., Sádaba, J., Lloyd, P. (eds.), DRS2022: Bilbao, 25 June - 3 July,
    Bilbao, Spain. https://doi.org/10.21606/drs.2022.157

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_9]: Drucker, J., McVarish, E. (2013). Graphic Design History A
    Critical Guide. Pearson, New Jersey.

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_10]: Duggan, B. (2013). The Rise of the In-House Agency. A. o. N.
    Advertisers.

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_11]: Silk, A. J., & Stiglin, M. M. (2016). Build It, Buy It Or Both?
    Rethinking the Sourcing of Advertising Services. International
    Journal of Marketing Studies, 8(1), p.1-13.

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_12]: Exploring ways to regulate and build trust in AI. (2023). a
    project report in the RAND Europe's annual review 2022 -2023.
    https://www.rand.org/randeurope/research/projects/exploring-ways-to-regulate-and-build-trust-in-artificial-intelli.html

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_13]: For deeper insights into the subject, further readings on the EbD
    framework for AI and repot summary of Virtual roundtable on
    labelling initiatives, codes of conduct and other voluntary
    mechanisms to build trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI) systems
    are recommended.

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_14]: Brey, P., Dainow, B. (2023). Ethics by design for artificial
    intelligence. AI Ethics. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00330-4

[^2_A3_KILINCARSLAN_15]: Prem, E. (2023) From ethical AI frameworks to tools: a review of
    approaches. AI Ethics, 3, 699–716.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-023-00258-9
