---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Crossovers And Collaborations: Reconsidering Design Studies Through 4th Generation University

Osman Demirbaş

The concept of university relies on the collaboration of people. It
basically refers to coming together, learning together, discovering
together, producing together. This approach could be enhanced with
several different verbs however it is more important to understand what
and/or how this collaboration should be employed. First of all, it is
very important to understand the realities, the frontiers and the
possibilities. University as an institution has a rich history. It might
be a good practice to start with understanding the concept of
university, or in other words what university means. The origin of the
idea refers to the concept of being universal as the word universe is
embedded in it. What does it mean to be universal? What are the criteria
of being universal? Simply, it can be claimed that universities are the
institutions that seek universal truth, conduct universal science, and
can accommodate all the ideas in the universe. The word university is
derived from the Latin expression universitas magistrorum et scholarium,
which refers to the community of students and teachers. In time, like
all other life phenomena, inevitably the universities have been changing
through the great changes and transformations in the world over the
centuries and taking on new missions.

The history of education can be dated back to almost 5000 years back to
32nd BC where Sumerians invented the writing which could be considered
as the establishment of a tradition of institutional and systemic
education in history. This tradition was continued by different cultures
for centuries, and by 3rd century BC, when the skeptic and scientific
approach became an indispensable part of education, it was transferred
to the ancient Greek tradition in the west, and to ancient Egypt’s and
Persian’s Mesopotamian tradition in the east. For many western scholars,
the beginning of universitas magistrorum et scholarium is the Athenian
School in 335 BC that was founded by Aristotle (Figure 1). However, it
is more the ancestor of scholastic guilds which was the cooperation of
students and masters then it was modified as universitas magistrorum, or
universitas scholarium, or universitas magistrorum et scholarium.[^3_A4_Demirbas_1]
[^3_A4_Demirbas_2] [^3_A4_Demirbas_3] [^3_A4_Demirbas_4]

![A group of people sitting in a row Description automatically
generated](media/image1.jpeg){width="6.5in"
height="2.763888888888889in"}Figure 1. Aristotle's School, a painting
from the 1880s by Gustav Adolph Spangenberg (source:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:The\_School\_of\_Aristotle.jpg)

![A building with a clock tower Description automatically
generated](media/image2.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="4.375in"}Figure 2.
University of Bologna (iStock.com/Sedmak)

## 4th Generation University (Gen 4 Uni)

Bologna University founded in 1088 in present-day Italy is considered to
be the first university.[^3_A4_Demirbas_5] Between the 12th and 15th centuries there
are several medieval universities founded in Italy, France, England,
Spain, Portuguese and Scotland in which the mainstream is teaching. In
these universities the education was mostly in Latin language and these
are considered as the 1st generation university.

Until the 19th century the main function of the university hadn’t
changed too much, however by the 19th century there was a significant
mission change which triggered the first revolution in the understanding
of universities. Through this revolution the mission of the universities
has been broadened by including the production of research together with
teaching. Starting from the early 19th century till the late 20th
century there were these 2nd generation universities which is also known
as the Humboldtian model of education. It is also known as the
Humboldtian education ideal.[^3_A4_Demirbas_6] [^3_A4_Demirbas_7] The core idea was to integrate the
arts and sciences with research in order to initiate a comprehensive
learning together with developing a cultural knowledge. It is the
holistic combination of research and studies to develop new knowledge
rather than just teach the existing. Research university concept was
influenced by and developed through the Humboldtian model. By this
revolution research was a part of the university and it has become the
responsibility of the scholars. By the late 20th century, the second
revolution in higher education occurred. Once more, the mission has been
broadened by encapsulating the economic development to research and
teaching which is the emergence of the 3rd generation university. These
are also known as entrepreneurial universities. Today a lot of the
universities around the globe are still under this category. The
entrepreneurial paradigm of the 3rd generation universities mostly
relied on knowledge-based regional innovation systems and linear
economic models. After the previous two revolutionary transitions
between the 1st-2nd and 2nd-3rd generations, this time the transition
from the 3rd generation to the 4th generation was more of a
transformation. The 4th generation university (it will be referred to as
Gen 4 Uni from this point on) mostly rely on a circular economy paradigm
(Figure 2). It emerges as a response to the environmental concerns of
our time. The new paradigm is related to growth and the new role of the
Gen 4 Uni is being one of the main stakeholders to support societal
change and transformation. Future and sustainability are the keystones
of Gen 4 Uni. In that sense, while preparing the leaders of the future
who will generate new knowledge to support a sustainable future through
economic growth, Gen 4 Uni has undertaken to transform itself into a
sustainable organization and to establish sustainability as a regional
management approach. With this understanding, Gen 4 Uni is not only the
center for teaching, research and innovation but also it is one of the
main actors of the co-creation of sustainable development.[^3_A4_Demirbas_8] [^3_A4_Demirbas_9]

  --------------------------- --------------------- ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Gen 1                 Gen 2                          Gen 3                                           Gen 4
  Objective                   Education             Education and research         Education, research and know-how exploitation   Education, research and open innovation
  Role                        Defending the truth   Discovering nature             Creating value                                  Enabling value creation
  Method                      Scholastic            Mono disciplinary science      Inter-disciplinary science                      Multi-actor innovation (trans-disciplinary science)
  Human Capital Development   Professionals         Professionals and scientists   Professionals, scientists and entrepreneurs     Professionals, scientists, entrepreneurs, artists, customers, ecosystem participants etc.
  Orientation                 Universal             National                       Global                                          Ecosystem
  Organization                Colleges              Faculties                      Institutes and Centers                          Innovation spaces
  --------------------------- --------------------- ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 1. Revolutionary transitions between 4 generations (adapted from
Steinbuch, M., 2016, “Towards the 4th Generation University”,
https://maartensteinbuch.com/2016/07/23/towards-the-4th-generation-university/).

A university does not need to be brand-new to be a Gen 4 Uni. Like in
3rd generation university, technology and innovation are indispensable
elements of a Gen 4 Uni however it is not enough. The main
characteristic of a Gen 4 Uni is how technology and innovation are
utilized so it is all about the vision and mission. Any university which
is aware of the current issues and act in that sense could transform
itself to a Gen 4 Uni. One important characteristic of Gen 4 Uni is the
fact that it is geographically embedded so the mission and vision will
vary accordingly. Universities that are considered to be Gen 4 Uni have
some extra qualifications suitable for the professions and structure of
the future. These universities should have a vision and mission that
ensures adaptation to the new order in which we are intertwined with
technology. The role of technology and innovation for Gen 4 Uni is
acquiring different ideas, adapting them to future industries and
providing new horizons for students.[^3_A4_Demirbas_10] [^3_A4_Demirbas_11]

Gen 4 Uni is based on a system that values people and life more. The
main objective is to provide various opportunities to meet people's
needs in an everchanging industrial world. Through a human-centered
approach, Gen 4 Uni glorifies the value given to people whose life
conditions are constantly changing with advancing technology. The main
goal of these universities is to keep up with the change and take all
necessary steps to change and improve themselves along with the change
without any hesitation. Keeping up with the developing and emerging
technologies it is possible for 4th generation universities to determine
the needs and lifestyles of future people. Therewith, these universities
also provide a learning environment and a new educational model for new
and future-proof job opportunities for individuals.

![](media/image3.tiff){width="5.926666666666667in"
height="3.4766666666666666in"}

Figure 3. Historical development of Industry 4.0 (source:
<https://blogs.sw.siemens.com/valor/2021/02/15/revolutions-are-only-visible-in-retrospect/>

After the first industrial revolution based on water and steam power,
the second industrial revolution in which electrical energy came to the
fore, and the third industrial revolution in which digital technologies
took place, Industry 4.0 offers numerous advantages through the
digitalization of the industry. However, this transition brings up some
new challenges, it is inevitable that the need for manpower will
decrease with the digitalization of the industry. By the progress of
this process, some professional groups will lose their validity in time
or will have to undergo major changes, which will cause the emergence of
new definitions, new jobs, new professions.[^3_A4_Demirbas_12]

## Industry 4.0

Gen 4 Uni concept is highly related with Industry 4.0, then what is
industry 4.0? To put it simply, Industry 4.0 is the fourth industrial
revolution, the new industrial vision of our age, in essence it is the
renaissance of industry. The main element of this renaissance is the
digitalization of industry, which is also the digitalization of life. In
its simplest form, the main outputs targeted by Industry 4.0 are;
ensuring resource efficiency, reducing costs and energy use, increasing
the quality, and managing business processes via computer.

This is the crossover where Industry 4.0 meets Gen 4 Uni. According to
Henrik von Scheel Industry 4.0 has been the greatest structural shift
for the last 250 years in which there is the transformation of the
scope, scale and complexity that we have never experienced.[^3_A4_Demirbas_13]
Artificial intelligence (AI), wearable technologies, quantum computing,
additive manufacturing, internet of things (IoT) and more are the
advancement of production and operations through digital technologies to
bring data driven intelligent actions to real life in which technology
is the means but not the end. According to Schell all these new
technologies are for creating a value in which people are the main
concern because people are responsible for guiding and implementing this
big change.[^3_A4_Demirbas_14] For that reason, it is important to employ a new higher
education system that meets the needs of this new era. It is important
to train young people who will build the future. As mentioned above it
is more important today to create a value rather than technology so as
Scheel underlines human beings are in the center of manufacturing,
operating, producing.

## Design 4.0

In the light of the above discussion it is possible to coin Design 4.0.
There is a need to improve the knowledge and skills of the designers
also in the new industrial revolution, however this has its own
challenges. It is useful to understand why industry 4.0 is important for
designers and, in this context, to consider what the Gen 4 Uni concept
offers for design education. Undoubtedly, this is a new time, a new
design phenomenon and a new designer identity. A natural human response
for any change is fight-or-flight. Designers are at a similar crossroad
today, when it comes to deciding whether to embrace the change through
this new understanding and use of technology or stick with the status
quo. According to Rogers’s “Diffusion of Innovation (DOI) Theory” there
are five main elements influence the spread of a new idea:[^3_A4_Demirbas_15]

● the innovation itself,

● adopters,

● communication channels,

● time, and

● a social system.

This process is largely relying on a social capital and for
self-sustainable innovation, this approach should be widely adopted. The
biggest challenge is the persistence of the individuals and companies in
their current paradigms missing the need to move forward. This claim is
also valid for universities.

Design has been a natural communication medium for human beings since
the beginning of time. It would not be wrong to look at it from the
upside down and claim that the history of design continues until the
very existence of man. However, major and rapid changes in the last 40
years have been seen and today, everything can be designed in an
alternative virtual world, analyzed and simulated for real life
conditions.

In the current discourse of the internet of things (IoT), artificial
intelligence (AI), smart designs, big data, virtual reality and more,
not only our ways of working, but also our lives, and even the whole
society are in a rapid change, and this is inevitable. As discussed
above, what needs to change in order for the industry to maintain its
place in the internet economy is defined as Industry 4.0. It means
uninterrupted support and regulation of value creation in production and
ensuring that all stakeholders benefit from the digitalization of
everything, the internet and all opportunities they provide as much as
possible. Industry 4.0 opens the door wide open for a new understanding
in design by enabling product development in all software and hardware,
communication of production and service processes, real-time information
exchange between machines, autonomous systems and optimization.[^3_A4_Demirbas_16]

Design as a universal communication medium, is also defined as the
strategic planning for production. Since a world without design is
inconceivable, in line with this great transformation in the industry,
it is not possible to ignore the Design 4.0 approach for success. In
parallel with the industrial revolutions, it is possible to talk about
three different design periods with very different structures and
effects. The first period was the longest one that starts with the
action of design until 1960s where the computers began to be used in
design. The second period was the invention of computer systems capable
of 2D representation that could graphically display the design on the
screen. In a short period of time by 1980s a new era started by computer
aided system (CAD) technologies, which provide digital 3D designs. The
4th period which could be stated as Design 4.0 is the beginning of 3D
design applications using design and automation systems over the
internet by the beginning of 21st century. This new approach provides
not only an uninterrupted communication between all stakeholders, but
also new phenomena in design as digital fabrication, user interaction
(UX), virtual reality, internet of things (IoT) and artificial
intelligence (AI) in design (Figure 4).

From a different point of view according to another approach that
considers the issue through the distinction between strategic and
systemic design, the change and evolution in design is referred under
four bounded domains. According to this approach, strategic design
refers to what a designer does whereas systematic design is a way
designer can do it. Where strategic design is associated with solving
any design problem through a set of principles in the process of design
action which addresses the profession, systemic design is a process of
the combination of systems and design thinking for embracing wicked and
complex problems. Systemic design requires a change that is spatial but
at the same time temporal.[^3_A4_Demirbas_17] [^3_A4_Demirbas_18] It is a changemaking approach in
design in which designers should take an important role in all social
and environmental issues (Figure 5).

![](media/image4.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.104166666666667in"}Figure
4. Four generations of design through drafting techniques and digital
technologies

![](media/image5.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="3.6326388888888888in"}Figure 5. Strategic Design to Systemic
Design, Design 1.0 – 4.0 (adopted from Jones, P. (2013) Design for
Care)[^3_A4_Demirbas_19]

## Design Studies and Research

In order to fit in the definition of Gen 4 Uni and fulfill the
requirements of an education for Design 4.0, the programs should follow
an integrated design understanding through an interdisciplinary
approach.

Integrated design brings different design professionals and experts on a
single problem. A broader range of experts working and contributing as a
team, rather than acting independently creates a multidimensionality.
Comprehending current problems and understanding the needs of people
multidimensionally and handling these problems in this respect are the
key factors of this new approach. The responsibility of contemporary
designers today is more than just creating unique designs but also
providing a betterment for the environment and life. Grudin claims that
good design tells the truth whereas bad design tells a lie, whereas a
lie is usually unrelated.[^3_A4_Demirbas_20] As mentioned above, with this big change
and transformation some disciplines will emerge soon and there will be
new definitions and new professions. This is also true for design so
design education should equip future designers with necessary skills of
Design 4.0.

It might be tempting to stick into the existing design discourse, which
could be understandable especially if someone thinks that is the only
truth. The main danger of such behavior is to become obsolete at the end
and unfortunately it is unavoidable. Then what could be the alternative
approach? It is crucial for the designers to identify extreme trends and
changes. These people are the ones who are actively experimenting and
experiencing. These people are more than just designers but active
innovators. These innovators do not stick themselves just in the
discipline of design (if it is possible to claim a sharp design
discipline anymore), while they connect with other designers, they also
communicate with other innovators in all other fields. It is not very
simple to become one of these innovative designers and it is always
challenging to encounter such innovators and, more importantly, to
become one of them. However, it is like a wonderland, there is a lot to
learn when you enter this direction. In order to get into this
direction, one should break away from the solid thinking of the
traditional idea of design and designer, and expose themselves to an
interdisciplinary or even transdisciplinary thinking model. This
transformation starts with questioning the existing paradigm of design
discourse (Design 3.0) and to find out the possible opportunities. In
order to achieve this, it is important to have absurd thinking, think
about the different, unusual, not existing, like TV platforms that have
changed the whole experience of television and cinema. In other words,
think out of the box. In order to be able to do that the meaning of
being a designer should be well-understood. This practice will help the
individual to reframe the realities of themselves. At the end of the
day, the purpose of designers will not change, but the processes will be
different.

Design 4.0 seeks individuals with multi-skills, so each designer should
figure out contrasting skills that fit with the current role as a
designer. Metaphorically, this equips the designer with the skills of
ambidexterity (to be able to use both hands) in order to find solutions
to new extremes world problems. In the existing paradigm, moving from a
multi-disciplinary approach to an inter-disciplinary approach is
necessary but not enough, it should go further as a move from
inter-disciplinary approach to a trans-disciplinary one. McGowan expands
the understanding of trans-disciplinary mindset in which it is not
merely an integration of human disciplines but it is also the
integration of human and AI (Figure 5).[^3_A4_Demirbas_21] According to her model this
integration is illustrated by an X shape on which the thinker (as
McGowan refers) is in the middle together with AI. In our case X-shape
thinker is the Designer 4.0 who thinks across disciplines, ready to
embrace challenges, equipped with technological capabilities in order to
create the new value.

The designer of the new era, eager to experiment is the key for the
triumph. Instead of fearing challenges, designers should learn to
embrace and adapt to the changing needs. Instead of just being an
architect, designer, engineer or else, an individual should act like a
scientist through cultivating a sense of intellectual humility by
constantly treating their existing ideas as hypotheses worth testing as
Grant refers.[^3_A4_Demirbas_22]

## Conclusion

Today, programming and coding is commonly considered to be an effort of
creating an application to fit for the purpose, often in an
industrialized environment. During Industry 3.0, early computational
work conducted by cumbersome and costly technology was focused on
producing utilitarian results. Later, Molnar who is an artist and a
technologist hypothesized that computational work could be a form of an
artistic expression.[^3_A4_Demirbas_23] This hypothesis has paved the new way for the
next generation to reconsider and redefine digital technologies in
Industry 4.0. Today, expressions like new media art or new media design
are very common but there is still a very dangerous distinction between
traditional method and technology-based method. This way of
understanding could be considered as one of the two significant threats
for a contemporary approach in design education which has been referred
to as Design 4.0. The second significant threat and another big
challenge is still remaining trapped in a disciplinary distinction.
Today it is very important for the new designer to equip themselves with
multi-skills of the 21st century, handling problems from a
trans-disciplinary approach and to be a good team member. Through a 4th
generation university approach, design education should equip future
designers with the skills of working in the intersection of emerging
technologies and life by that means utilizing design expertise to find
out opportunities for innovation.

![](media/image6.tiff){width="6.5in" height="3.498611111111111in"}Figure
6. Trans-disciplinary mindset model of McGowan (source: McGowan, H. E.
“What If The Future Of Work Starts With High School?”)[^3_A4_Demirbas_24]

## References

Ertüzün, A. (2022) Geçmişten geleceğe üniversite kavramının dönüşümü.
Sarkaç.
https://sarkac.org/2022/03/gecmisten-gelecege-universite-kavraminin-donusumu/

Grant, A. (2021). Think Again: The Power of Knowing What You Don't Know.
Ebury Publishing.

Grudin, R. (2010). Design and Truth. Yale: Yale University Press.

Günther, KH. (1988) Profiles of educators: Wilhelm von Humboldt
(1767-1835). Prospects, 18, 127–136. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02192965)

Heald, J. E. (1975) Universitas Magistrorum et Scholarium. Phi Kappa Phi
Journal. 55(2). 9.

Jones, P. (2013). Design for Care: Innovating Healthcare Experience. New
York: ‎ Rosenfeld Media.

Loconte, J. (2021) Bologna: Birthplace of the University. The Heritage
Foundation 50 Years.
https://www.heritage.org/education/commentary/bologna-birthplace-the-university

McGowan, H. E. (2019). What If The Future Of Work Starts With High
School? Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/heathermcgowan/2019/04/03/what-if-the-future-of-work-starts-with-high-school/?sh=5cafcd785964

Moggridge, B. (2006). Design Interactins. Massachussets: The MIT Press.

Molnar, V. (1975). Toward Aesthetic Guidelines for Paintings with the
Aid of a Computer. Leonardo. 8(3). 185-189

Öztel, H. (2019) Why 4th Generation Universities? 4th Generation
University: Co-creating A Sustainable Future. Linkedn Newsletter.
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/4th-generation-university-co-creating-sustainable-oztel-sfhea-/?trackingId=crBkkcxlTnSJmG5K5ZBCrg%3D%3D

Pei, E., Kim, S. J., Kim, S., Lee, D., Lee, S. and Self, J. (2023)
Design education 4.0: Technology-driven design futures and the future of
design education. IASDR Congress 2023 Life Changing Design, Politecnico
de Milano. doi.org/10.21606/iasdr.2023.165

Riche, P. (1976) Education and Culture in the Barbarian West: From the
Sixth through the Eighth Century. Columbia: University of South Carolina
Press.

Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations (5th Ed.). New York: Free
Press.

Rüegg, W. (1991) Foreword: The University as a European Institution. A
History of The University in Europe, Ed. Hilde de Ridder-Symoens.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. XIX-XX.

Salahi, A.M., Mohammadi, H. A., Ahmadian, M. and Khanlarzadeh, E. (2021)
Move to the Fourth-Generation Universities: A Systematic Scoping Review
of Educational and Management Strategies. Strides in Development of
Medical Education. 18(1). 1-9.

Tonga, M.Y. and Tonga M. (2022) Overview of Industry 4.0: The Future of
The Industry. G. Ü. İslahiye İİBF Uluslararası E-Dergi. 6 (6). 40-60.

Verger, J. (1999) The universities and scholasticism. The New Cambridge
Medieval History V. Ed. David Abulafia. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. 256-278. https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521362894.014

Von Scheel, H. (2023) Industry 4.0: Think Value, Not Tech. Nokia.
https://www.nokia.com/thought-leadership/articles/industry-4-0/three-key-drivers-for-success/?did=D00000004947&gad\_source=1&gclid=CjwKCAiA44OtBhAOEiwAj4gpOTSHfNB0yuwCiQeTE4y2ra6-WOK6rp7qt5Atsutkxa4yDh5OyjkAEhoCJPEQAvD\_BwE

[^3_A4_Demirbas_1]: Riche, P. (1976) Education and Culture in the Barbarian West: From
    the Sixth through the Eighth Century. Columbia: University of South
    Carolina Press.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_2]: Rüegg, W. (1991) Foreword: The University as a European
    Institution. A History of The University in Europe, Ed. Hilde de
    Ridder-Symoens. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. XIX-XX.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_3]: Verger, J. (1999) The universities and scholasticism. The New
    Cambridge Medieval History V. Ed. David Abulafia. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press. 256-278.
    https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521362894.014

[^3_A4_Demirbas_4]: Heald, J. E. (1975) Universitas Magistrorum et Scholarium. Phi
    Kappa Phi Journal. 55(2). 9.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_5]: Loconte, J. (2021) Bologna: Birthplace of the University. The
    Heritage Foundation 50 Years.
    https://www.heritage.org/education/commentary/bologna-birthplace-the-university

[^3_A4_Demirbas_6]: Günther, KH. (1988) Profiles of educators: Wilhelm von Humboldt
    (1767-1835). Prospects, 18, 127–136.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02192965)

[^3_A4_Demirbas_7]: Ertüzün, A. (2022) Geçmişten geleceğe üniversite kavramının
    dönüşümü. Sarkaç.
    https://sarkac.org/2022/03/gecmisten-gelecege-universite-kavraminin-donusumu/

[^3_A4_Demirbas_8]: Salahi, A.M., Mohammadi, H. A., Ahmadian, M. and Khanlarzadeh, E.
    (2021) Move to the Fourth-Generation Universities: A Systematic
    Scoping Review of Educational and Management Strategies. Strides in
    Development of Medical Education. 18(1). 1-9.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_9]: Öztel, H. (2019) Why 4th Generation Universities? 4th Generation
    University: Co-creating A Sustainable Future. Linkedn Newsletter.
    https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/4th-generation-university-co-creating-sustainable-oztel-sfhea-/?trackingId=crBkkcxlTnSJmG5K5ZBCrg%3D%3D

[^3_A4_Demirbas_10]: Tonga, M.Y. and Tonga M. (2022) Overview of Industry 4.0: The
    Future of The Industry. G. Ü. İslahiye İİBF Uluslararası E-Dergi. 6
    (6). 40-60.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_11]: Von Scheel, H. (2023) Industry 4.0: Think Value, Not Tech. Nokia.
    https://www.nokia.com/thought-leadership/articles/industry-4-0/three-key-drivers-for-success/?did=D00000004947&gad\_source=1&gclid=CjwKCAiA44OtBhAOEiwAj4gpOTSHfNB0yuwCiQeTE4y2ra6-WOK6rp7qt5Atsutkxa4yDh5OyjkAEhoCJPEQAvD\_BwE

[^3_A4_Demirbas_12]: Tonga, M.Y. and Tonga M. (2022) Overview of Industry 4.0: The
    Future of The Industry. G. Ü. İslahiye İİBF Uluslararası E-Dergi. 6
    (6). 40-60.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_13]: Öztel, H. (2019) Why 4th Generation Universities? 4th Generation
    University: Co-creating A Sustainable Future. Linkedn Newsletter.
    https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/4th-generation-university-co-creating-sustainable-oztel-sfhea-/?trackingId=crBkkcxlTnSJmG5K5ZBCrg%3D%3D

[^3_A4_Demirbas_14]: Von Scheel, H. (2023) Industry 4.0: Think Value, Not Tech. Nokia.
    https://www.nokia.com/thought-leadership/articles/industry-4-0/three-key-drivers-for-success/?did=D00000004947&gad\_source=1&gclid=CjwKCAiA44OtBhAOEiwAj4gpOTSHfNB0yuwCiQeTE4y2ra6-WOK6rp7qt5Atsutkxa4yDh5OyjkAEhoCJPEQAvD\_BwE

[^3_A4_Demirbas_15]: Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations (5th Ed.). New
    York: Free Press.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_16]: Pei, E., Kim, S. J., Kim, S., Lee, D., Lee, S. and Self, J.
    (2023) Design education 4.0: Technology-driven design futures and
    the future of design education. IASDR Congress 2023 Life Changing
    Design, Politecnico de Milano. doi.org/10.21606/iasdr.2023.165

[^3_A4_Demirbas_17]: Jones, P. (2013). Design for Care: Innovating Healthcare
    Experience. New York: ‎ Rosenfeld Media.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_18]: Moggridge, B. (2006). Design Interactins. Massachussets: The MIT
    Press.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_19]: 14\. Jones, P. (2013). Design for Care: Innovating Healthcare Experience.
    New York: ‎ Rosenfeld Media

[^3_A4_Demirbas_20]: Grudin, R. (2010). Design and Truth. Yale: Yale University Press.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_21]: McGowan, H. E. (2019). What If the Future of Work Starts With
    High School? Forbes.
    https://www.forbes.com/sites/heathermcgowan/2019/04/03/what-if-the-future-of-work-starts-with-high-school/?sh=5cafcd785964

[^3_A4_Demirbas_22]: Grant, A. (2021). Think Again: The Power of Knowing What You
    Don't Know. Ebury Publishing.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_23]: Molnar, V. (1975). Toward Aesthetic Guidelines for Paintings with
    the Aid of a Computer. Leonardo. 8(3). 185-189.

[^3_A4_Demirbas_24]: Moggridge, B. (2006). Design Interactins. Massachussets: The MIT
    Press.
