---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Learnings from Izmir University of Economics Design Studies Program

Deniz Avci, Tuba Doğu

This chapter presents an analysis of the Design Studies (DS) Program at
Izmir University of Economics (IUE) and provides insights into the
current curriculum, drawing on successful global and local Design
Studies programs. Recognizing seminal discussions[^4_A5_Avci_Dogu_1] on design studies
and examining both national (Turkey) and international (USA) programs,
the study utilizes the notion domain to define and explain the curricula
of the selected programs. This approach is then applied to evaluate the
curriculum of the IUE DS program, providing its strengths and areas for
improvement. Consequently, the chapter is organized in two sections: (1)
an overview of DS programs, and (2) an analysis of current IUE DS
curriculum under three domains: subject, scale, and mediums.

## A Look into Design Studies Programs

Following an overview of established Design Studies programs around the
world, we structured this paper around a comparative analysis of
successful approaches to provide a basis for a critical overview of the
IUE DS curriculum. Given the scope of this study, it is not possible to
evaluate each global and local program individually, so we present one
of the most established design studies programs offered by Harvard
University.

Harvard University’s comprehensive approach to design education stands
as a prominent model within the field, offering an extensive array of
disciplines prior to 2021 (Figure 1). The Design Studies program at
Harvard University encompassed seven distinct fields for the Master
Program in Design Studies, which are: (1) Art, Design, and the Public
Domain, (2) Critical Conservation, (3) Energy and Environment, (4)
History and Philosophy of Design and Media, (5) Risk and Resilience, (6)
Technology, (7) Urbanism, Landscape and Ecology. Among these distinct
fields which were called the “areas of concentration”, notable fields
like risk and resilience, along with critical conservation, exhibit a
high degree of specialization. Conversely, domains such as urbanism,
landscape, ecology, art, design, and the public domain appear to adopt a
broader scope.

Following Fall 2021, Harvard underwent a significant transformation in
its approach, transitioning from the concept of “areas of concentration”
to “domains,” resulting in a more focused and refined representation of
expression and content. These areas are proposed as (1) Ecologies, (2)
Mediums, (3) Narratives, (4) Publics (Figure 2) and when we examine
them, we encounter a spectrum that covers both specific and general
topics. It is intriguing to note that while the titles prior to 2021
hinted at disciplinary trends, the new titles do not provide any
discernible references to particular disciplines. However, a deeper look
into domains reveals that this situation changes.

![Several black squares with white text Description automatically
generated](media/image1.jpeg){width="6.5in"
height="3.5791666666666666in"} Figure 1. Harvard University Design
Studies Program Area of Concentration pre-Fall 2021

![A screenshot of a computer screen Description automatically
generated](media/image2.jpeg){width="6.5in"
height="2.134027777777778in"} Figure 2. Harvard University Design
Studies Program Area of Concentration after Fall 2021

To give a brief idea of the concept of “domain,” in “Ecologies”, the
keywords such as climate, health, and equity stand out. The domain
covers all scales of design under these keywords. Under each domain,
there are two mandatory courses, and the others are offered as
electives. The notion of domain, which then becomes an umbrella term,
spans across and points to various specializations.

As the number of the main “domains” decreases, it is intriguing to note
the emergence and increase of sub-domains within our examination. There
are approximately 3 to 5 sub-domains under each, and before graduation,
the students are asked to take electives from different sub-domains. An
illustrative instance can be found in the ecology field, where
sub-headings such as cultures, atmospheres, geographies, publics, and
projections are introduced. Under each sub-domain, there are
theme-related courses. For example, under “Atmospheres”, there are
courses about “climate justice”, “planning sustainable urban
environments”, “climate by design”, “power/energy”, and “confronting
climate change”. Among the various domains, the domain of “Ecologies”
stands out as the domain encompassing the highest number of subdomains.

According to the program’s statement, this area of study is particularly
for individuals who might pursue careers in the areas of “critical,
transdisciplinary design, management practices working in the public
realm and relative to broader environmental issues; leadership in
political, governmental, NGO, and non-profit realms, especially around
public and environmental policy; research and teaching in and adjacent
to the design and planning disciplines, including the development of
pedagogy around environment, infrastructure, and equity”.

The domain of “Mediums” appears to be more discipline-specific. After
evaluating the subdomains and course titles, it becomes evident that the
program offers a multitude of diverse courses that cater to students’
desire to specialize in specific areas. This encourages students to
explore different perspectives and fosters specialization within the
program. Hence, the program showcases both quantitative and qualitative
diversity. In the domain of mediums, keywords such as “developments in
contemporary culture”, “creative design”, and “technological
experimentation” stand out among others; and sub-domains of
architecture, landscape architecture, and urban planning and design are
introduced. Comparatively, it can be inferred that this domain primarily
focuses on the broader urban and architectural scale, contrasting with
the preceding domain.

Even though the domain “Narratives” is also discipline-specific when
compared to the domain of “Ecologies” and covers the same disciplines as
the “Mediums” domain, its approach to the assessment of the fields is
different. As explained by the program and summarized here, the domain
of narratives has a different approach: “Narrative does not merely
depict an objective account of historical events or provide a definitive
understanding of culture. \[…\] Instead, narrative actively shapes and
constructs literary and spatial elements that allow cultures to be
perceived as dynamic arenas for ‘projection, dispute and
transformation.’”[^4_A5_Avci_Dogu_2]

The domain “Publics” focuses on “human groups and their roles”,
“interactions”, and “experiences within the built and natural
environment.” The domain once again \[similar to the domains of
“Mediums” and “Narratives”\], has three subdomains of architecture,
landscape architecture, and urban planning; however, the approach is
different, focusing on socio-spatial design, planning, and advocacy. The
listed courses cover a wide range of topics related to urban studies,
design history, and social impact. These provide students with
opportunities to explore heritage conservation, migration, housing
policy, equitable development, climate justice, land policy, and
sustainable planning. These courses offer a comprehensive and
interdisciplinary approach to understanding the complexities of built
environments and their social, cultural, and environmental dimensions.
The program also emphasizes the importance of inclusivity,
participation, and addressing social and cultural factors in landscape
design. The program offers a wide range of courses that explore the
intersection of architecture, public spaces, and societal issues.

To compare the Izmir University of Economics’ Design Studies Graduate
Program with one from home, we looked at one of the closest, the Izmir
Institute of Technology.[^4_A5_Avci_Dogu_3] The program presents a set of compulsory
courses. There are three pairs of courses to choose from. All students
must take one of these course pairs, the first functions as a design
studio, the second focuses on research in the design field, and the
third is more flexible with seminar courses. In addition, there is a
thesis course and a specialized studies course that need to be
completed.

The elective courses offered cover a wide range of topics, including
specialized areas such as artificial intelligence, mechatronics,
communication and design, consumption culture, craft and design, and
cultural studies. The courses also explore critical design practices,
design management, design patterns and methods, design thinking and
innovation, the politics of representation, sustainability, and user
interaction. This diverse scope provides students with the opportunity
to gain expertise in various aspects of design and choose areas of
specialization based on their interests and goals.

## Analysis of Current IUE Design Studies Curriculum

To gain insights into the course scopes and contents of the IUE DS
program curriculum, we have compiled the courses offered in the last two
semesters in a table. The table meticulously captured the weekly
contents of the courses offered on a semester basis. Our objective was
to identify overlapping themes, topics, readings, and theories, both
generally and specifically in relation to weekly readings. Reading
through this table, we first classified the courses based across various
(1) design disciplines and, secondly, categorized the courses in the (2)
curriculum according to different domains. Rendering these two stages,
three potential domains emerge: subjects, scales (both of which are
covered by the courses), and mediums (of the courses).

The IUE’s Design Studies appears to offer a diverse range of courses
across various design (1) disciplines. In the field of industrial
design, courses suggest an emphasis on understanding the relationship
between design and everyday life, exploring innovative materials and
their applications, as well as commitment to sustainable design
practices. For architecture, the courses demonstrate an exploration of
conceptual and interdisciplinary approaches to architectural design. The
courses encourage students to think critically about the role of
architecture in shaping our environment and cultural expressions. The
interior architecture and environmental design courses appear to address
various aspects of design discourse. Courses offer a theoretical
foundation for understanding design principles, their application, and
the exploration of spatial design strategies and their impact on human
experiences. In the field of fashion design, the program largely covers
the issues of ethics, social responsibility, and trend analysis,
providing students with an understanding of the fashion industry and its
societal implications. Finally, within visual communications design, the
course likely encourages students to develop a strong narrative approach
and visual storytelling skills in their design practice.

Within the (2) curriculum, when we categorize the courses according to
their (2a) subjects, we acknowledge that these titles may not always
provide a definitive delineation (Figure 3). It is worth noting that a
course categorized under “urban” may also have relevance to the domain
of “culture.” In other words, a course has the potential to fall under
multiple headings. Therefore, considering the contents as a means of
introducing the work and adopting a comprehensive and categorical
approach would be beneficial. This approach facilitates a thoughtful
exploration of the courses offered.

Analyzing the same courses in terms of their (2b) scale of approach
reveals a distinct perspective (Figure 4). Interestingly, the majority
of the courses, in alignment with the program’s objectives and scope, do
not explicitly focus on a specific scale. It is possible that students
are encouraged to select one of these courses that aligns with their own
interests, mirroring the domain and sub-domain approaches observed in
Harvard’s program. However, among the courses, there are those that do
engage with various scales, ranging from the urban scale to the object
scale and encompassing everything in between. Topics span from domestic
architecture to public architecture to photography. This diverse range
of scales suggests a comprehensive exploration of design in different
contexts, allowing students to develop a holistic understanding of
design’s impact on various scales of the built environment. By
organizing the highlighted courses based on their scale of approach, we
can categorize them according to their respective subjects. Upon careful
examination of our program, we can observe a distinct pattern where
certain courses within the same domain are offered on a semester basis,
leading to an overlap in subjects.

![A list of fashion items Description automatically generated with
medium confidence](media/image3.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.71875in"}
Figure 3. Subjects covered by the courses of IUE’s Design Studies
Graduate Program

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="5.4in" height="4.79in"}

Figure 4. Scales (or Measures) covered by the courses of IUE’s Design
Studies Graduate Program

In our final categorization, we examine the (2c) mediums of assessment
utilized in the courses, revealing that only a limited number of courses
incorporate a specific medium (Figure 5). Consequently, it appears that
this approach may not be practical for establishing distinct domains
within our program.

Overall, the program seems to offer a broad spectrum of courses that
address various aspects of design studies. Such a diverse curriculum can
provide students with a comprehensive understanding of design theory and
practice across different disciplines; however, it hinders the
development of any specialization on a certain path of design.

![A close-up of a list Description automatically
generated](media/image5.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="2.575in"}Figure 5.
Mediums covered by the courses of IUE’s Design Studies Graduate Program

## Concluding Remarks

In the evaluation made on the second day of the Design Studies Symposium
2023, the areas where workshop participants are currently working for or
have been involved in the Design Studies program were conveyed by them
through keywords via the Mentimeter word cloud (Figure 6). While this
word cloud acknowledges the emergence of popular trends such as
bio-design, artificial intelligence, or interaction design, it can also
help to re-evaluate the areas chosen to analyze the DS curriculum.

Analysis of the IEU DS curriculum suggests that the most relevant
potential domains in our university program are scales and subjects.
Although the domain medium may not seem particularly relevant at first
glance, it does not overshadow the fact that the design studies program
is truly interdisciplinary in nature. While the discussion of the
interdisciplinary nature of the program is beyond the scope of this
article, it should nevertheless be noted that the background of the
program candidates is not limited to the discipline of design.

The analysis carried out in this article with the domain approach sheds
light on the current and potential future adjustments in the curriculum,
thus providing a basis for a critical overview of the IUE DS curriculum.
Such an approach is intended to serve as a model for the IUE DS program
as well as provide guidance for other design studies programs nationwide
to reflect on their curricula. Whereas this article attempted to provide
a general and outsider perspective on the DS program at IEU, the
succeeding articles in this section will offer insider reflections on
the DS curriculum.

![A screenshot of a computer Description automatically
generated](media/image6.jpeg){width="6.5in"
height="3.658333333333333in"} Figure 6. A keyword cloud generated by
symposium participants through Mentimeter

## References

Findeli, Alain. “Design History and Design Studies: Methodological,
Epistemological and Pedagogical Inquiry.” *Design Issues* 11, no. 1
(1995): 43–65. https://www.jstor.org/stable/1511615.

Harvard University Graduate School of Design. “Master in Design Studies
- Narratives.” Accessed February 5, 2024.
https://www.gsd.harvard.edu/design-studies/narratives/.

Izmir Institute of Technology. “Tasarım Çalışmaları Ders Programı
\[Design Studies Curriculum\].” Accessed May 15, 2023.
https://id.iyte.edu.tr/tasarim-calismalari-programi-2/.

Margolin, Victor. “Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and
Methods.” *Design Issues* 11, no. 1 (1995): 4–15.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/1511610.

Traganou, Jilly. “Architectural and Spatial Design Studies: Inscribing
Architecture in Design Studies.” *Journal of Design History* 22, no. 2
(2009): 173–81. https://www.jstor.org/stable/40301436.

[^4_A5_Avci_Dogu_1]: Victor Margolin, “Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter
    and Methods,” *Design Issues* 11, no. 1 (1995): 4–15,
    https://www.jstor.org/stable/1511610; Alain Findeli, “Design History
    and Design Studies: Methodological, Epistemological and Pedagogical
    Inquiry,” *Design Issues* 11, no. 1 (1995): 43–65,
    https://www.jstor.org/stable/1511615; Jilly Traganou, “Architectural
    and Spatial Design Studies: Inscribing Architecture in Design
    Studies,” *Journal of Design History* 22, no. 2 (2009): 173–81,
    https://www.jstor.org/stable/40301436.

[^4_A5_Avci_Dogu_2]: Harvard University Graduate School of Design, “Master in Design
    Studies - Narratives,” accessed February 5, 2024,
    https://www.gsd.harvard.edu/design-studies/narratives/.

[^4_A5_Avci_Dogu_3]: See the curriculum of Design Studies program offered by Izmir
    Institute of Technology: Izmir Institute of Technology, “Tasarım
    Çalışmaları Ders Programı \[Design Studies Curriculum\],” accessed
    May 15, 2023,
    https://id.iyte.edu.tr/tasarim-calismalari-programi-2/.
