---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Rethinking Fashion: Bio-Design Approach to Enhance Well-Being

Filiz Özbengi Uslu

## Introduction

In an era of growing environmental concerns, a reconsideration of the
complex relationship between fashion, sustainability, circularity, and
holistic well-being is at the forefront of the current discourse.
Historically characterized by rapid trends and mass consumption, the
fashion industry now faces the urgent need for transformative actions
that address both planetary boundaries and societal well-being. As
sustainable textiles emerge as an important response to environmental
challenges, their impact on promoting well-being is becoming a central
inquiry.

### Wellbeing and Fashion: Significance of Well-being in the Context of Planetary Boundaries

The concept of planetary boundaries is essential in exploring a refined
understanding of well-being, as it interweaves the well-being of
humanity with the delicate balance of our natural environment. The basic
premise of the concept of planetary boundaries lies in the complex link
between human well-being and the proper functioning of the natural
environment. This perspective suggests that by consciously adhering to
and operating within the defined boundaries set by planetary boundaries,
we have the capacity not only to sustain but also to enhance human
well-being.[^6_S1_Uslu_1] This perspective goes beyond ecological concerns to
include dimensions of social justice, and the aim is to create a safe
ecological space for all living beings. In the face of global ecological
crises and the rapid decline of biodiversity, conventional frameworks
often fail to bridge the gap between environmental restoration and the
wider quest for equitable well-being.

In exploring the relationship between well-being and planetary
boundaries, the concept of well-being has been linked to economic
growth, particularly in Western societies. Criticisms of subjective
interpretations of well-being highlight the unsustainable emphasis on
material criteria, driven by limitless human desires. To address these
challenges, the discussion shifts towards ecopsychology, which advocates
for a paradigm shift towards achieving genuine well-being through our
deep connection with nature.[^6_S1_Uslu_2] Maintaining the integrity of the Earth
system and the vital ecosystem services requiresa considered definition
in which the persistence of species and populations is protected to the
extent that they are able to persist into the future. Within this
framework, organisms are given the opportunity not only to exist, but to
thrive and achieve a comprehensive state of well-being.

In exploring this discourse, it becomes clear that a broad understanding
of well-being goes beyond the mere survival of species. It encompasses
the dynamic processes that allow organisms to adapt, evolve and coexist
harmoniously within the complex pattern of the Earth system and includes
the flourishing of life in all its different manifestations.

### Review of Well-being Through the Perspective of Body and Clothing

The dynamics between human well-being and this broader environmental
context are broad and diverse, encompassing physical and mental health
as well as subjective well-being, a realm in which individual happiness
and satisfaction find expression. Tracing the historical roots of
defining well-being, eudaimonical well-being is a concept rooted in
Aristotelian philosophy.[^6_S1_Uslu_3] As opposed to a constant outcome,
eudaimonia is the pursuit of realizing one's essential nature, promoting
virtues, and living in harmony with oneself. Hedonic well-being, a
parallel definition, offers a contrasting perspective on well-being by
focusing on human emotions.[^6_S1_Uslu_4]

The concept that bridges these dimensions is the concept of
‘flourishing’ which defines positive emotions, engagement,
relationships, meaning, and achievement as the five elements of
flourishing according to PERMA theory.[^6_S1_Uslu_5] Considering the connection of
well-being with the body and clothing, well-being, which is no longer
limited to the fields of philosophy and psychology, has emerged as an
important movement in recent decades, intertwined with the fashion
industry. The industry's interest in well-being stems from the rejection
of unrealistic body ideals and the global health crisis that catalyzed
the financial recession of the early 2000s.

Within this consumer-centered view, clothing becomes an important factor
in the well-being narrative that can contribute to psychological
well-being in two ways: hedonic well-being, where clothing evokes
pleasure and positive emotions, and eudaimonic well-being, where
clothing provides a sense of fulfillment or meaning. The psychological
impact of clothing is also emphasized as a process of transforming
socially approved conventions into self-approved values. Conformity to
social norms is seen as crucial for psychological well-being as it
fosters feelings of belonging and competence. Beyond its social context,
the integral link between body and clothing is widely recognized and
fashion is defined as an embodied practice. Clothing is not just an
outer layer; it is a tool that shapes emotions and influences cognitive
experiences. Autobiographical memories associated with clothing play an
important role in the creation and maintenance of a coherent narrative
identity deemed essential for psychological well-being.

A significant issue emerges in this connection between well-being, body,
and clothing; do the practices of the fashion industry enhance these
effects or create an illusion? In delving into this issue, the complex
relationship between individual well-being, environmental concerns, and
the impact of the fashion industry on our sense of self-image comes to
the forefront, prompting a deeper reflection on the symbiotic
relationship between our well-being and the choices we make in fashion.

### Integrating Well-being: A Focus on Fashion Design and Industry

In the world of fashion design and industry, the concept of well-being
needs to extend beyond aesthetic concerns to embrace ethical practices
throughout garment production. From design to distribution, there is a
growing discourse exploring new materials and economic models to reduce
the ecological impact of fashion. However, the roots of the global
fashion industry go into the deep and are entangled with the history of
human-environment interactions affecting ecosystems. Today, the fashion
industry is at the forefront of an environmental crisis that negatively
impacts nature and humanity. The fashion industry contributes
significantly to climate change, biodiversity loss, and social justice
concerns.[^6_S1_Uslu_6] The extensive use of water, chemicals, and excess energy
usage in the supply chain is impacting the planet, especially the
developing countries. Recent efforts to reduce the negative impacts of
the fashion industry have focused predominantly on the supply side,
focusing on changes in products or outcomes. Product-oriented strategies
aim to improve the environmental sustainability of production processes
by incorporating measures such as the use of more sustainable materials
and energy sources. Alternatively, outcome-oriented approaches address
how products are marketed, distributed, or disposed of. However, the
generalised categorisation of all natural materials as inherently safe
and all synthetic materials as harmful overlooks and oversimplifies the
multiple environmental and social externalities associated with
textiles, which include both natural and man-made varieties. In this
case, a paradigm shift is imperative. The emphasis on well-being through
alternative economic models, such as the post-growth approach, is
compatible with a circular fashion economy that addresses both social
and environmental factors. This requires material innovation in fashion
design and production, with a focus on circular materials that reduce
waste.[^6_S1_Uslu_7]

Accordingly, how can material innovation be seen as a remedy to the
problem of waste generated by the fashion industry, before addressing
consumption patterns, and can textiles promoted as ‘sustainable’ and
‘green’ meet this challenge?

### A Brief Examination of Sustainable Textiles and Their Influence on Well-being in Fashion

### 

Marked by rapid trend changes, the world of fashion is constantly giving
birth to new garments, leaving a significant impact on the economy and
the global environment. However, the wave of ‘fast fashion’, synonymous
with disposable, affordable clothing, has led to reflections that
require close examination. This fast-paced fashion paradigm has become a
major contributor to environmental and social degradation, with the
sector's notorious water consumption, chemical pollution, and
significant carbon emissions.[^6_S1_Uslu_8] The consequences, ranging from
resource exploitation to negative impacts on workers and complex supply
chain intricacies, underscore the urgent need for environmentally
friendly and socially responsible alternatives.

Textile production, which has historically relied on synthetic fibers
derived from non-renewable resources such as petroleum, increases
environmental damage. The high carbon dioxide emissions and energy
consumption associated with synthetic fibers, combined with the release
of non-biodegradable microfibers into the environment during washing,
have negative impacts on aquatic ecosystems and biodiversity. In
response to this ecological crisis, it has gained importance in response
to the call for sustainable textiles. Natural fibers such as organic
cotton, bamboo, hemp, jute, and ramie are emerging as signifiers of
sustainability on this transformative path. However, even with textiles
derived from these natural fibers, which are considered sustainable and
included in the scope of bio-based textiles, challenging problems
remain. Although these materials have long been considered sustainable,
the extensive industrialization of the sector creates its own
challenges. While bio-based textiles have the potential to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, they often require significant water and land
use.[^6_S1_Uslu_9] In the case of cotton, a densely grown natural fabric that
requires a significant amount of water consumption. The textile
industry's impact on the world's clean water supply, with 20% of
pollution attributed to fabric dyeing, processing chemicals, and
pesticide use, further underlines the urgency for change. Moreover, the
textiles that are often associated with sustainability can carry hidden
complexities. Textiles such as viscose and modal, which are often touted
for their comfort, can contain synthetic and chemically processed
components, challenging the narrative of their sustainable impact unless
their production processes are transparent.[^6_S1_Uslu_10]

Given all these complex but interconnected problems, it is clear that
the fashion industry requires innovative materials that can be
maintained in a closed loop, where raw materials based on renewable
resources replace those using non-renewable resources, and that can
continue this loop with minimal waste.

## Bio-design and Fashion

As the fashion industry continues to evolve and adapt, new approaches
are emerging that combine the worlds of biology and design. These
innovative approaches, known as bio-design, have added a new dimension
to the ecological and social challenges created by fashion, drawing
inspiration from the natural world and incorporating biological
principles to create innovative and circular fashion design solutions.

### Addressing New Materials in Fashion Within Bio-design 

In an era of increasing awareness of environmental crises fostered by
unsustainable practices in the fashion industry, bio-design is emerging
as a source of promise toward a more circular and innovative future.
Located at the intersection of biomimicry, bioengineering, and synthetic
biology, bio-design represents a transformative design approach that
integrates basic biological principles and extends to the construction
of structures, objects, and tools.[^6_S1_Uslu_11] Bio-design challenges the status
quo in the fashion industry by emphasizing regenerative production
models, the use of biodegradable materials, and circular economic
models. The move away from traditional carbon-intensive practices opens
avenues for rethinking and redefining the relationship between planetary
boundaries and human well-being. Bio-design is at the forefront of the
development of a range of materials derived from plants and organic
systems and is evidence of the industry's commitment to circular
practices. Since this study focuses on the material part of bio-design
and concepts including 'bio' are often confused with each other, Figure
1 shows how bio-based and bio-fabricated materials are positioned in
literature.

From reusing agricultural or food waste to producing yarn from unusual
sources such as orange peel, seaweed, and even leather from grape or
apple skins, the possibilities are expanding. Innovations like Flora
Fur, a sustainable, biodegradable fur made from milkweed (Figure 2) and
Algiknit, a seaweed-based, entirely biodegradable material (Figure 3),
exemplify the fusion of creativity and circularity in fashion.[^6_S1_Uslu_12]

![A diagram of bio-based materials Description automatically
generated](media/image1.jpeg){width="3.4611111111111112in"
height="3.4680555555555554in"}

**Figure 1.** Positioning ‘Bio’ Terms (Adapted from Biofabricate and
Fashion for Good, 2020)

![A close up of a white fluffy object Description automatically
generated](media/image2.jpeg){width="2.903846237970254in"
height="2.145in"}

**Figure 2.** Flora Fur, Milkweed Based Fur (Source: circumfauna.org,
2021)

![A white plastic bag with a string Description automatically generated
with medium confidence](media/image3.jpeg){width="3.25in"
height="2.1585225284339455in"}

**Figure 3.** Algiknit, Bioyarn Molded From Algae (Source:
www.materialdriven.com, 2020)

Taking bio-design to the next level, some designers are creating fashion
products produced by living organisms. Roya Aghighi's Biogarmentry
collection (Figure 4), for instance, is made from algae that
photosynthesize the air, requiring care akin to tending to a plant.[^6_S1_Uslu_13]
These initiatives are reshaping the market, with even luxury fashion
brands investing intensively in this transformative space.

![A room with white clothes on swingers Description automatically
generated with medium confidence](media/image4.jpeg){width="4.3125in"
height="3.222397200349956in"}

**Figure 4.** Biogarmentry, Clothes Made From Algae (Source: dezeen.com,
2019)

While many bio-design and fashion collaborations may seem like
speculative material experiments, advancements in technology and ongoing
research suggest a transformative role in the fashion design process.
The functional capabilities of bio-designed materials not only cater to
aesthetic and functional needs but also indirectly contribute to the
well-being of planetary boundaries and human flourishing. When we
consider the material in the relationship between bio-design and
fashion, textiles, defined as bio-based and bio-fabricated materials are
not only experimental but also reshape the circularity of fashion.
Derived from biomass such as plants or animals, bio-based textiles offer
an environmentally friendly alternative to traditional petroleum-based
textiles. Often produced using living organisms, these materials offer
an opportunity to challenge the linear economy model of the fashion
industry.[^6_S1_Uslu_14] However, it is crucial to recognize that not all
bio-based materials are produced ethically, as their environmental
impact depends on factors like raw material sources, cultivation
practices, and processing methods.

Apart from bio-based materials, bio-fabricated materials, a term
originally associated with the medical sector, have expanded to include
the production of complex living and non-living biological products.
With their biological origin and circular potential, bio-fabricated
materials are attracting significant research. These materials not only
offer an alternative to traditional production models but also
contribute to social transformation by reducing labor exploitation,
which is particularly prevalent in global textile production. While
bio-based and bio-fabricated materials often aim to replicate existing
alternatives, there's a need to appreciate their unique qualities. From
vitality to impressionability and responsiveness, these emerging
materials possess distinctive characteristics that extend beyond
mimicking properties of traditional counterparts. Future research in
this realm should broaden its scope, delving into the experiential
aspects and the nuanced environmental and social impacts of these
innovative materials.

### The Need for Bio-design to Create a Circular Fashion System

Understanding the interconnectedness of all life with nature and with
other life is to realize what it means to design in a genuinely
biological and circular way. Criticized for its environmental damage,
the fashion industry is undergoing a transformative shift towards
circular fashion. This paradigm seeks to minimize resource dependency
and water consumption, recognizing the urgent need for change in an
industry that is responsible for 63% of garment fibers derived from
plastics.[^6_S1_Uslu_15] As a response to this crisis, bio-fabricated materials
are emerging as a promising solution, in line with the ethos of the
circular fashion paradigm to responsibly close the production loop. At
the center of this evolution is the garment production process, a
crucial stage where designers traditionally favor materials with
significant environmental impacts. This decision shapes the final
products on the market, perpetuating the ecological consequences of the
industry.

Bio-design, in particular, challenges the entrenched pillars of fast
fashion, proposing a departure from the relentless production schedules
dictated by current economic models and seasonal fashion trends. In
terms of materials that are grown or fabricated with a bio-design
approach, circular design revolves around the creation of regenerative
systems that minimize waste, optimize resource efficiency, and promote
the well-being of both the environment and societies. While circularity
also suggests a system in which materials are continuously reused, the
principle of continuous reuse of materials is in contradiction with the
fact that materials in bio-design are often produced to be short-lived
and highly biodegradable. This biodegradability and compostability
principles encourage the development of bio-based and bio-fabricated
materials that naturally degrade without harming the environment. These
can be organisms that do not require land use or pesticides as they grow
in salty seawater such as brown algae, food waste that goes to landfills
such as citrus or eggshells, ethically harvested oyster shell waste or
plants, or myceliums that are grown through fermentation and
decomposition process and require far less energy, water and other
resources than conventional material production. However, as we embrace
the potential of bio-design, questions arise about its ability to effect
social and ecological transformation. Critics argue that for bio-design
to fulfill its promise, it needs to lead us toward diverse, equitable
models that prioritize the flourishing of all biologies, not just human
well-being.[^6_S1_Uslu_16] This raises an important question about the role of the
fashion designer within this evolving circular system.

As the industry moves forward at the intersection of innovation and
social responsibility, the fashion designer becomes a key actor tasked
with shaping a future where circular fashion is not just a buzzword, but
a tangible and transformative reality. The shift towards a circular
paradigm through bio-design is forcing both the industry and its
practitioners to embrace a more responsible, interconnected vision.

### Examining Bio-designed Textiles from a Well-being Perspective

In the current quest for well-being and environmental sustainability,
bio-design seems to have emerged as a pioneer, offering innovative
solutions that go beyond traditional pharmaceutical approaches. The
fashion industry is witnessing an increase in products and processes
designed not only for aesthetics but also for technical functionality.
When exploring the field of well-being and bio-designed textiles, much
of the existing literature revolves around smart textiles and wearable
technologies.[^6_S1_Uslu_17] Among these, medical and paramedical textiles are
notable, attracting attention in applications ranging from cosmetics to
skincare and the improvement of thermal comfort.

An outstanding example is Mi Terro, which specializes in
probiotic-infused textiles by converting agricultural waste into
high-quality, low-cost, and scalable textiles (Figure 5). This
innovative approach not only challenges microplastics but also maximizes
the use of biomass through a blend of biopolymers and natural fibers.
When it comes to incorporating herbs, SmartSilk produces bedding with a
blend of silk and Aloe Vera fibers (Figure 6). Aloe Vera is known for
its skin-soothing properties. Infusing these fibers into sheets and
pillowcases creates a sleep environment that nurtures skin health and
overall well-being. It is a good indication that this type of textile
can have an industrial counterpart in terms of being quite
commercial.[^6_S1_Uslu_18]

![A hand in a plastic wrap Description automatically
generated](media/image5.jpeg){width="2.183333333333333in"
height="2.981554024496938in"}

**Figure 5.** Mi Terro, Bioplastic from Bio-mass (Source:
www.miterro.com, 2021)

![A hand holding a small object Description automatically
generated](media/image6.jpeg){width="2.8666666666666667in"
height="3.0023447069116362in"}

**Figure 6.** SmartSilk, Bedding From Silk and Aloe Vera (Source:
smartsilk.com, 2022)

Venturing beyond traditional textiles, Vollebak, an avant-garde clothing
line, integrates algae into its fabrics (Figure 7). The photosynthetic
feature of algae enables these garments to actively contribute to air
purification, fostering a microenvironment that supports respiratory
health.

![A hand pointing at a t-shirt Description automatically
generated](media/image7.jpeg){width="2.408333333333333in"
height="1.6040113735783028in"}

**Figure 7.** Biodegradable T-shirt Made From Plants and Algae (Source:
www.fibre2fashion.com, 2020)

The scope of bio-design extends to bio-pigment production, utilizing
organisms like bacteria, yeasts, fungi, and algae to naturally
synthesize pigments. These pigments find applications in various
industries, from textiles to cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and food,
offering novel properties beneficial for both human health and the
environment.[^6_S1_Uslu_19]

The most prominent example of this innovation continues with new dyeing
applications in textiles exemplified by the new technology of the Living
Colour bio-design initiative. In collaboration with ArtEZ CoE Future
Makers, Wageningen University & Research and designers, they have
carried out studies to improve the growth conditions and patterns,
pigment quality and colour spectrum of bacteria (Figure 8).

Offering an alternative to artificial textile dyes, which are extremely
harmful to the planet and human health, textile dyes derived from
bacteria are used in collaboration with sportswear brand Puma to produce
a collection of various moisture-absorbent natural fibres that change
colour according to the season of the garment, emphasising environmental
concerns as well as user experience (Figure 9).

![A blue and white cloth on a clear plate Description automatically
generated](media/image8.jpeg){width="2.425in"
height="2.9079254155730534in"}

**Figure 8.** Bacteria Dye by Living Colour (Source: livingcolour.eu,
2019)

![A person's face covered in a mesh Description automatically
generated](media/image9.jpeg){width="1.9416666666666667in"
height="2.9236646981627294in"}

**Figure 9.** Design to Fade, Living Colour & Puma (Source:
designtofade.puma.com, 2020)

In the field of bio-design, it is possible to analyze the social and
cultural factors involved in the creation of medical and therapeutic
textiles. Moreover, exploring these factors within the bio-design can
reveal ways of incorporating these new-generation textiles into everyday
life as a means of promoting biodiversity at a local dimension. With a
better understanding of bio-design, creating new materials using
scalable and responsible technologies could indirectly provide a
valuable collaborative strategy for reassessing biodiversity.

## 

## 

## Conclusion

The concept of well-being in fashion design has been closely associated
with ethical and socially responsible practices. This paper argues for a
comprehensive reassessment of fashion practices, addressing issues such
as overconsumption, the problem of waste and material innovation. It
emphasizes the need to move from a growth-oriented fashion system to one
that values post-growth principles and actively promotes individual and
societal well-being. The discourse extends to bio-based and
bio-fabricated materials, emphasizing their importance in reshaping the
fashion industry towards circularity, while the evolving role of the
fashion designer is portrayed as a key player in the symbiotic
relationship between design and biology. As envisioned in bio-design, to
establish a collaborative working relationship with a living organism,
designers need to provide a suitable growth environment. In return, the
living organism will produce a material or perform a function. Designers
can now grow their materials and manipulate their morphology as they
grow, rather than relying on existing pre-fabricated materials.

Fashion designers in particular are demonstrating that it is possible to
go beyond the traditional boundaries of their discipline in testing
materials, hybridizing them with science, engineering, and
biotechnology, and adopting an increasingly transdisciplinary approach.
Fashion designers are now interested in the conceptualization of the
material and it is becoming a real driving force and collaborator.
Furthermore, exploring the scalability and responsible application of
bio-design technologies in the fashion industry remains a critical area
of research. Understanding how these inventions can be efficiently
incorporated into everyday life by promoting biodiversity is a promising
direction for further research.

## References

Aghighi, Reza. 2020. "What if Our Clothes Were Alive and
Photosynthesized?" APRIA Journal 1, no. 1 (2020): 120-128.

Biofabricate and Fashion for Good. 2020. "Understanding ‘Bio’ Material
Innovation: A Primer for the Fashion Industry."

D’Olivo, Paolo, and Elvin Karana. 2021. "Materials Framing: A Case Study
of Biodesign Companies’ Web Communications." The Journal of Design,
Economics, and Innovation 7, no. 3 (2021): 403–434.

Del Gesso, Claudia. 2021. "Sustainable Fashion: From Material to
Immaterial through Biodesign." PAD 14 (PAD\# 20 Fashion and Textile
Design Reconstruction): 130-151.

Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2017. "A New Textiles Economy: Redesigning
Fashion’s Future." \[Online\] Available at:
<https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/a-new-textiles-economy-redesigning-fashions-future>.

European Environment Agency (EEA). 2021. Plastic in Textiles: Towards a
Circular Economy for Synthetic Textiles in Europe. Brussels: European
Commission. \[Online\] Available at:
<https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/plastic-in-textiles-towards-a>

Fletcher, Kate. 2016. Craft of Use: Post-growth Fashion. Routledge.

Ginsberg, Alexandra Daisy, and Natsai Audrey Chieza. 2018. "Editorial:
Other Biological Futures." Journal of Design and Science.

Jacometti, Valentina. 2019. "Circular Economy and Waste in the Fashion
Industry." Laws 8, no. 4 (2019): 27.

Moran, John. 2018. "Aristotle on Eudaimonia ('Happiness')." Think 17,
no. 48 (2018): 91-99.

Muthu, Subramanian S., and Miguel Angel Gardetti, eds. 2020.
Sustainability in the Textile and Apparel Industries. Cham: Springer,
163-187.

Myers, William, and Paola Antonelli. 2012. Bio Design: Nature, Science,
Creativity. London: Thames & Hudson.

Ryan, Richard M., and Edward L. Deci. 2008. "Self-determination theory
and the role of basic psychological needs in personality and the
organization of behavior." In Handbook of Personality: Theory and
Research, edited by Oliver P. John, Richard W. Robins, and Lawrence A.
Pervin, 654–678. The Guilford Press.

Seligman, Martin E. P. 2011. Flourish: A Visionary New Understanding of
Happiness and Well-Being. London, UK; New York, NY, USA: Free Press.

Steffen, Will, Johan Rockström, Ida Kubiszewski, and Robert Costanza.
2013. "Planetary Boundaries: Using Early Warning Signals for Sustainable
Global Governance." In Planetary Boundaries and Human Opportunities,
edited by Steve Carpenter, 259–275. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Usman, Hajiya Maryam, Nafeesat Abdulkadir, Mohammed Gani, and Hassan
Muhammad Maiturare. 2017. "Bacterial Pigments and Its Significance." MOJ
Bioequiv Availab 4 (2017): 285–288.

van der Meer, Yvonne. 2017. "Sustainable Bio-Based Materials:
Opportunities and Challenges." In Proceedings of the Biotech France 2017
International Conference, Paris, France, June 28, 2017, pp. 1-5.

Winter, Duane D. N., and Susan M. Koger. 2004. The Psychology of
Environmental Problems. 2nd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Inc.

Zhao, Ming, Yang Zhou, Jing Meng, Hui Zheng, Yu Cai, Yuli Shan, Dabo
Guan, and Zhifeng Yang. "Virtual Carbon and Water Flows Embodied in
Global Fashion Trade–A Case Study of Denim Products." Journal of Cleaner
Production 303 (2021): 127080.

[^6_S1_Uslu_1]: Will Steffen et al., "Planetary Boundaries: Using Early Warning
    Signals for Sustainable Global Governance," in Planetary Boundaries
    and Human Opportunities, ed. Steve Carpenter (Edward Elgar
    Publishing, 2013), 259–275.

[^6_S1_Uslu_2]: Duane D. N. Winter and Susan M. Koger, The Psychology of
    Environmental Problems, 2nd ed. (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.,
    2004).

[^6_S1_Uslu_3]: John Moran, "Aristotle on Eudaimonia ('Happiness')," Think 17, no.
    48 (2018): 91-99.

[^6_S1_Uslu_4]: Richard M. Ryan and Edward L. Deci, "Self-determination theory and
    the role of basic psychological needs in personality and the
    organization of behavior," in Handbook of Personality: Theory and
    Research, ed. Oliver P. John, Richard W. Robins, and Lawrence A.
    Pervin (The Guilford Press, 2008), 654–678.

[^6_S1_Uslu_5]: Martin E. P. Seligman, Flourish: A Visionary New Understanding of
    Happiness and Well-Being (Free Press, 2011).

[^6_S1_Uslu_6]: Ellen MacArthur Foundation, "A New Textiles Economy: Redesigning
    Fashion’s Future," \[Online\] Available at:
    https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/a-new-textiles-economy-redesigning-fashions-future.

[^6_S1_Uslu_7]: Kate Fletcher, Craft of Use: Post-growth Fashion (Routledge,
    2016).

[^6_S1_Uslu_8]: Valentina Jacometti, "Circular Economy and Waste in the Fashion
    Industry," Laws 8, no. 4 (2019): 27.

[^6_S1_Uslu_9]: Ming Zhao et al., "Virtual Carbon and Water Flows Embodied in
    Global Fashion Trade–A Case Study of Denim Products," Journal of
    Cleaner Production 303 (2021): 127080.

[^6_S1_Uslu_10]: Subramanian S. Muthu and Miguel Angel Gardetti, eds.,
    Sustainability in the Textile and Apparel Industries (Springer,
    2020), 163-187.

[^6_S1_Uslu_11]: William Myers and Paola Antonelli, Bio Design: Nature, Science,
    Creativity (Thames & Hudson, 2012).

[^6_S1_Uslu_12]: Claudia Del Gesso, "Sustainable Fashion: From Material to
    Immaterial through Biodesign," PAD 14 (PAD\# 20 Fashion and Textile
    Design Reconstruction) (2021): 130-151.

[^6_S1_Uslu_13]: Reza Aghighi, "What if Our Clothes Were Alive and
    Photosynthesized?" APRIA Journal 1, no. 1 (2020): 120-128.

[^6_S1_Uslu_14]: Biofabricate and Fashion for Good, "Understanding ‘Bio’ Material
    Innovation: A Primer for the Fashion Industry" (2020).

[^6_S1_Uslu_15]: European Environment Agency (EEA), Plastic in Textiles: Towards a
    Circular Economy for Synthetic Textiles in Europe (Brussels:
    European Commission, 2021), \[Online\] Available at:
    https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/plastic-in-textiles-towards-a

[^6_S1_Uslu_16]: Alexandra Daisy Ginsberg and Natsai Audrey Chieza, "Editorial:
    Other Biological Futures," Journal of Design and Science (2018).

[^6_S1_Uslu_17]: Yvonne van der Meer, "Sustainable Bio-Based Materials:
    Opportunities and Challenges," in Proceedings of the Biotech France
    2017 International Conference, Paris, France, June 28, 2017, pp.
    1-5.

[^6_S1_Uslu_18]: Paolo D’Olivo and Elvin Karana, "Materials Framing: A Case Study
    of Biodesign Companies’ Web Communications," The Journal of Design,
    Economics, and Innovation 7, no. 3 (2021): 403–434.

[^6_S1_Uslu_19]: Hajiya Maryam Usman et al., "Bacterial Pigments and Its
    Significance," MOJ Bioequiv Availab 4 (2017): 285–288.
