---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Design Challenges in The Sustainable Use of Props in Scenic Design

### Elif Karakuş, Deniz Hasirci

## Introduction

This chapter discusses the scenic design process regarding the use,
transportation, and storage of props and to discuss how to apply
sustainability to scenic design. In this context, there are several
challenges and solutions to these challenges. The design process, the
main actors in this process, design elements; selection, making,
transportation, storage, and recycling of props are discussed through
this paper with the help of existing literature and guidance by
professionals in different fields related to scenic design.

According to Brako and Gilbert,[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_1] designing and building of scenery
backgrounds for theatre, film, and television is called, scenic design.
Theatre, film, and television scenic design have similar approaches,
similar techniques, and aesthetic requirements.

The existing publications lack research on the current issues and the
problems of the scenic design process in live performing arts, the use
of props in contemporary performances, the challenges of the use,
transportation, storage of props, and possible solutions with the help
of various design strategies, and scenic design in the world and
Türkiye. New insights are required in using design solutions to deal
with these issues, particularly in the context of Turkish and
international scenic design in performing arts.

Therefore, this paper aims to focus on scenic design in Türkiye, to
discover the challenges regarding the use, transportation, and storage
of props in scenic design, and to suggest several solutions such as
modular design, reuse and storage of props, and the use of digital
technology in design under the name of sustainability. The study focuses
on the challenges regarding the use, storage, and transportation of the
design materials and possible solutions to avoid the waste of materials,
and how to apply sustainability to the scenic design process. Methods
include interviews with professionals in this field such as digital
artists, scenic designers, theatre organizations, and municipal
theatres; and a survey applied to the selected scenic designers. The
outcomes of the interviews explain the scenic design process in Türkiye
and how it works, the challenges dealt with during a scenic design
process, existing solutions for the challenges and how effective they
are, the problems to be solved, and suggested solutions from the
interviewed professionals and how effective they can be, individuals
that are responsible during the process, the possible scenic design
developments such as to find the most suitable material use for each
prop, to get the lowest cost during the scenic design process in the
most efficient way and to apply the sustainability to the scenic design
focusing on modular design, reuse-storage, and digital technology in
Türkiye.

Findings from meetings with municipal and private theatres and
interviews with scenic designers and digital artists show that there are
challenges related to the lack of professionals that are working and the
budget problems in municipal theatres. Solutions, such as, work shared
between existing members of a production team, to select plays with low
costs, making props in the workshop of the theatre, and reuse them by
storing or modifying them are created by the head of the municipal
theatre and other individuals. In addition, private theatres have
similar challenges, including the transportation of props. Budget,
storage, and reuse of props often present difficulties that are common
for both municipal and private theatres. There is lack of awareness of
sustainable scenic design in Türkiye, as well as digital technology use
and awareness in scenic design mainly caused by the cost.

With the help of sustainability, design strategies and digital
technology, alternative solutions for material use and design process in
scenic design are suggested and these solutions are compared to find the
most effective solution with the help of professionals and articles. It
is aimed that solutions to be gained from this study may benefit scenic
designers, producers and performing artists.

## Scenic Design

Scenic design is visualizing a specific scene of a performance for the
audience by using design strategies. The expression that is aimed to be
given to the audience is designed by a scenic designer with the help of
production team members.

According to Bergfelder, Harris, and Street,[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_2] scenic (set) design
provides a movie its unique appearance and places it in historical,
social, and cultural settings. Sets help with character identification
and psychological expression in addition to offering material details
and environmental conditions. Sets create mood and atmosphere by working
in harmony with lighting and sound design to evoke feelings that either
support or contradict the story. The storytelling is greatly impacted by
the perspective of scenic designer, which also affects audience
perspective, spatial dynamics, color, materials, and temporal components
for improved narrative coherence and flow.

Wolf and Block,[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_3] point out that each theatre form has its own needs.
If the form is literary where the spoken words play an important part in
the performance, the design visualizes the atmosphere where the event is
happening at that point when the actors are having a conversation. The
musical forms, including musicals or dance performances, have a scenic
design which has to be comfortable for the movement of the performers.
Because of the bigger moves the musical performers have than the
literary form theatre performers, the space has to be designed as the
props will allow the performers to move freely. However, literary formed
theatres also need a perfectly designed space for each movement of the
performers; each second of the performance will be thought wisely and
the props will be designed as they will not cause trouble with the
movement of the performers. Scenic design includes stage lighting,
decoration, costumes, set construction, and set placement.[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_4] It is the
process of visualizing the script or a visual way of storytelling. There
are several challenges before the design process, during the design
process, and after the design process. This thesis discusses the process
of the design, the actors and the elements of the design process, the
challenges, the issues, and possible solutions to several problems.

### *Elements of Scenic Design: Props and Flats*

The word “prop” is the short term for ‘property’ and is any object used
in a performance. “Prop is defined as “any portable article, as an
article of costume or furniture, used in acting a play: a stage
requisite, appurtenance, or accessory.[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_5] The Oxford English Dictionary
finds the first usage of “props” in 1841, while the singular form of
“prop” appeared in 1911.

A wide variety of items essential to scenic design and performances are
referred to as props. They consist of props used by actors, furnishings,
and structural components of the stage like the walls and floors. These
materials, which can be divided into three categories: hand props,
personal props stored in costumes, and action props, all add to the
overall mood, enhance actor interactions, and improve the visual story.

Props can be bought from auctions, consignment shops, retail stores,
thrift shops, salvage yards, garage sales, or online marketplaces. Using
pieces from a collection or stock is generally referred to as
pulling.[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_6] Even though buying pieces may be the easiest option, the
props still might need to be repainted, resized, or adapted to fit
within the overall design concept and contribute effectively to the
storytelling.[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_7] Utilizing their own inventory of a theatre can save
money and give quick access to the needed props and costumes.[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_8]
However, if an item is modified, added, or removed, the inventory needs
to be updated to avoid confusion and misleading those searching for
those items. If theatres build a relationship with each other, it will
be beneficial for both sides since they can borrow props from each
other. Collaborative prop and costume sharing among theatres, especially
for smaller ones with budget constraints, reduces costs, enhances
creativity, and promotes idea exchange among designers during the
pulling process.

Gloman and Napoli,[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_9] examine flats by their forms: vertical and
horizontal. Flats are vertical pieces that serve as backdrops or walls,
while platforms are horizontal structures that provide a surface for
performers to stand on. Basically, there is a need for a horizontal
element for people to stand on and something vertical behind them in
order to create an ideal space to tell the stories. Flats are simpler
versions of walls with less structure, less cost, and less time to
build. But there is more to the use of flats. To create scenery that is
lighter and more portable than a wall, flats are built. Meanwhile, walls
are built where they are meant to be built, flats are constructed
somewhere else than they will be used, and they are stored and set up
when it is required.

The process of designing a prop begins when the scenic designer closely
examines the script to understand the needs for both practical and
aesthetic props. Determining the quantity and significance of props for
the story is guided by an extensive understanding of the script. A
consistent design language is ensured by efficient communication
throughout the design team. Durability, safety, authenticity, and
aesthetic are all considered while choosing materials. If building is
needed, the designer works with craftspeople; otherwise, props might be
rented from prop houses. To guarantee operation and safety, performances
are followed by extensive testing.

Props must be transported safely to avoid damage while being moved
between storage, rehearsal areas, and performance sites. Prop size,
quantity, and features all have a role in the choice of vehicle; little
cars work well for smaller plays, while trucks or vans work well for
larger ones. Careful loading and unloading are ensured by specialized
personnel to prevent damage. Temperature and humidity control during
transportation are essential. To avoid any delays, loading, unloading,
and transportation must all be completed on time.

The storage of props is highly required to avoid the waste of stage
materials and keep them for reuse in other productions. Therefore, it
decreases the unnecessary use of materials to build a new prop every
time. The Turkish scenic designer Serkan Kavurt (the scenic designer of
the “Tatavlada Son Dans / Last Dance in Tatavla” play) states that each
production has its own storage of props. The production stores the props
considering the reuse of the props or the materials that the props are
made of, such as fabrics, metal structure and more. The organization of
the storage has to be well designed for easy access to the needed props.
The other purpose of the prop storage is to avoid the mess of materials
in working fields. Props are stored in a variety of sizes, from the
smallest ones to huge flats. There are different ways of storing. The
most common storage type is the shelf system for each type of prop or
the box.[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_10]

Props waste is the term used to describe the incorrect treatment and
disposal of props used in theatrical productions in the context of
scenic design. This may involve storing an excessive amount of unneeded
or extra props, as well as treating and throwing them improperly after
use. The waste of props can be caused by several reasons. Scenic
designers can decrease waste, lower resource consumption, and encourage
more eco-friendly approaches to theatrical productions by using
sustainable techniques and conscious management of props.

## Sustainable Design

Shedroff [^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_11] states that an approach to design and development known
as sustainability sets a focus on environmental, social, and economic
factors. Sustainable solutions aim to improve the various systems that
support our way of life, including the effective use of natural
resources, efficient use of capital and markets, and reduction of
pollution and waste in the environment, all without negatively impacting
people all over the world. Sustainability highlights practical,
cost-effective solutions that benefit people, the environment, and
companies. According to Shedroff, sustainability can be examined under
five main topics which are reduce, reuse, recycle, restore, and process.
The methods for reducing material and energy use are the focus of the
reduction part. It starts with designing or redesigning process because
reducing the use from the very beginning has a big impact on
sustainability. Reuse focuses on methods that make products, services,
environments, and mechanisms last longer to avoid unnecessary
production. The life span of these elements can be extended by using
smart design and engineering strategies. In order to develop products
that are more easily recycled helps to prevent the unnecessary use of
raw materials. However, something being recyclable does not mean that it
is recycled. This process needs to be controlled to make sure the
production process is suitable recycling the product. The use of a
sustainable product or service is impactful; however, the storage is
just as important. There is still a lot of work to do in order to make
changes for the effects we have had in the past, in addition to reducing
the impact the actions will have in the future. Once awareness of the
methods is provided, it has to be known how to include them in the daily
processes.

Hart,[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_12] approaches sustainability as an essential requirement in
stage design. In many ways, the field of props is currently
environmentally friendly. The props that would be thrown away are mostly
kept and stored for future use, and especially for those who are working
in low-budget productions or educational settings, recycling, reusing,
repurposing, and upcycling materials are required.

## Understanding Practical Applications in Türkiye

According to Schwarz and Sudman,[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_13] the quality of a survey depends on
the answers the survey respondents provide, and through an online survey
was selected for this study, it was easier to reach the needed number of
participants from different places in Türkiye in a short time. The
survey responses were supported by meetings and interviews with
professionals to get more detailed information.

As a first step, the meetings with municipal and private theatres were
arranged with the intent of getting general information about the
production team, the scenic design process, and the challenges they face
during this process. Interviews with one selected digital artist and
scenic designers followed the meetings. It was aimed at getting
practical information from professionals who work actively in the field.

## Meetings

### *Municipal Theatres*

Meetings were the first step of the study, so that the raw data
collected from previous studies and literature determined the questions
for the meetings. The first aim was to contact the municipal theatres to
explore how the scenic design process is handled and who the authorities
are in this process. Additionally, it was aimed to ask the challenges
and their solutions if any exists. Meetings with the provincial director
of culture and tourism and the head of the city theatres were arranged.
The related municipality chose not to disclose its name due to privacy
issues.

After the meeting, I was informed that it is a hard process to get
permission to get budget information. It is stated that there is a lack
of financial support for the city theatres and because of budget
problems, plays with a minimum royalty rate have to be chosen, or they
write their own plays that will cost the minimum. Usually, at least two
plays are arranged per year, and each member of the team deals with each
issue during the process. The municipal theatre of the city that is
chosen for this study commonly chooses theatre plays for children since
its scenic design process is the easiest and the cost is the lowest. It
is also discussed that there is not a professional design team, as
discussed in previous chapters. After the play is chosen by the head,
with the help of a craftsman and other team members, the scenic design
gets completed. Previous props are mostly stored backstage or in the
prop rooms downstairs. There is not enough space for all of the
properties; therefore, even the backstage is used as storage. The main
issues arising from the discussion with the municipal theatre including
insufficient financial support, leading to the selection of plays with
the easiest and least costly design processes, a lack of a qualified and
professional design team, and inadequate storage spaces for props.

### *Private Theatres*

The status of municipal theatre directed the study to private theatre
organizations. Hasan Özkaya Organization is chosen for the study. After
contact with the owner of the organization, permission was given to
witness the process of installation of two plays, Muhteşem İkili (The
Great Duo, directed by Atilla Şendil), and Tatavlada Son Dans (Last
Dance in Tatavla, directed by Berfin Zenderlioğlu). Hasan Özkaya, the
owner of the organization, discussed the process for private theatres
and stated several problems.

Hasan Özkaya mentioned some of the problems, such as budget limitations,
lack of materials and equipment in theatres, transportation, and more.
Due to the lack of financial support, the organization has a limited
budget for each theatre play. It is arranged to use a minimum of
vehicles for transportation; in fact, sometimes even the actors use the
same vehicle with the scenic design equipment. The technician also
mentioned that the lighting designer has to consider each situation and
design lighting according to it because the lighting equipment may not
be enough.

The first example of an assessed theatre play is Great Duo, and the main
material that is used in the play is theatre flats. Each flat has a
different size, a different design, and different openings. Even though
the main idea behind each flat is the same as a framed wooden flat, each
piece has a unique design and gathers to create the whole background of
the scenic design (Figure 1).

![](imgs/7.1.tiff){width="4.133333333333334in" height="3.1in"}

Figure 1. Muhteşem İkili (The Great Duo, directed by Atilla Şendil)

The process of the installation begins as the props and design elements
are brought by the vehicle. Firstly, technicians measure the stage and
adapt the design according to the measurement. The reuse of the scenic
background of this play is possible since the materials are theatre
flats, which are basically wooden frames with coverings. If the
coverings are removed, it is possible to reuse the wooden frames for
future plays (Figures 2, 3).

![](imgs/image2.tiff){width="5.026666666666666in"
height="3.013333333333333in"}

Figure 2. Muhteşem İkili (The Great Duo, directed by Atilla Şendil)

![](media/image3.tiff){width="5.06in" height="3.79in"}

Figure 3. Muhteşem İkili (The Great Duo, directed by Atilla Şendil)

The Last Dance in Tatavla play has a political topic, and the design
concept is a collapsed construction. The background of the stage was
made of pieces that have a more complex design than traditional theatre
flats. They have the same purpose, yet the joints are more complex.

The structure has a stone texture to represent the era when the
buildings were damaged and people were forced to migrate (Figures 4, 5,
6). The damaged texture is supported by lighting to create the feeling.
The designer, Kavurt, stated that this structure has a detailed
calculation to keep it balanced. He also mentioned that it is hard to
reuse this design considering the removal process for the elements. It
has to be done wisely to use some of the elements for recycling.

![](media/image4.tiff){width="4.55in" height="3.41in"}

Figure 4. Tatavlada Son Dans (Last Dance in Tatavla, directed by Berfin
Zenderlioğlu)

![](media/image5.tiff){width="2.2466666666666666in"
height="2.9966666666666666in"}

Figure 5. Tatavlada Son Dans (Last Dance in Tatavla, directed by Berfin
Zenderlioğlu)

![](media/image6.tiff){width="2.3866666666666667in"
height="3.183333333333333in"}

Figure 6. Tatavlada Son Dans (Last Dance in Tatavla, directed by Berfin
Zenderlioğlu)

The illuminated structure behind the main design represents undamaged
buildings. The designer mentioned that even though it is hard to reuse
the tyrofoam structure, the metal frames in the background can be used
for similar purposes (Figures 7, 8). The lighting also supports the
design (Figure 9).

![](media/image7.tiff){width="2.9266666666666667in" height="2.19in"}

Figure 7. Tatavlada Son Dans (Last Dance in Tatavla, directed by Berfin
Zenderlioğlu)

![](media/image8.tiff){width="3.76in" height="2.1266666666666665in"}

Figure 8. Tatavlada Son Dans (Last Dance in Tatavla, directed by Berfin
Zenderlioğlu)

![](media/image9.tiff){width="3.59in" height="1.9133333333333333in"}

Figure 9. Tatavlada Son Dans (Last Dance in Tatavla, directed by Berfin
Zenderlioğlu)

The owner of the organization, Hasan Özkaya, faces several challenges,
including a lack of financial support, insufficient materials and
equipment in the theatre halls, and the need to minimize the use of
vehicles due to transportation costs.

## Interviews

The research questions of the study aim to find out the challenges
regarding the use of props in sustainable scenic design and possible
solutions to the challenges with the help of the understanding of
Shedroff (2009), which is that sustainability can be examined under five
main topics, which are reduce, reuse, recycle, restore, and process;
digital technology use and alternative design strategies.

The first interviewee was a digital artist, Can Büyükberber, who has
widely known works. The aim of the questions was to acknowledge the
artist and his works, his approach to digital technology use in art and
scenic design; his understanding of sustainability, and the use of
digital technology in sustainable design.

According to Büyükberber, in a design process, dates are determined by
the places where the art will be held, such as venues, galleries, and
the like the preparation process is also considered. If the artwork is
custom designed, it requires time for design, rendering, and sound
design. Mutual understanding, transparency, and consensus with curators
or brands are also important factors in the communication between the
artist and the client. If there is a budget limitation for a new design,
licensing an existing work shortens the timeline and costs less.

Through the technology called StageCraft, developed by Lucasfilm, the
large-scale LED screens allow artists to create backgrounds with various
environments, such as deserts or poles. Thus, once the LED screens are
provided, it requires less material than a scenic design created with
physical props and costs less in the long term. It also provides
realistic camera movements, various reflections on actors, and real-time
lighting opportunities.

Digital technology also provides communication speed. It significantly
reduces logistical challenges and energy inefficiencies associated with
the transportation of physical materials from one place to another.

The idea of modular design in sustainable design was inspired by the
scenic design of the theatre play “Evlat” (Child). The second interview
was arranged with the scenic designer of this play, Sıla Karakaya, who
actively takes part in important projects in Türkiye. The questions were
created in order to find out the challenges of the scenic design
process, the solutions if any exist, the sustainable design approach of
Karakaya, and her opinion on modular design.

The design concept was determined by the needs of the producer.
According to Karakaya, It is not ethical to use one of the designs of a
designer by other designers; therefore, it is not possible to create a
modular design that will be utilized in different designs. However, an
efficient modular design could help sustainability if it is designed
wisely.

Although LED screens provide dynamic visual possibilities, because of
the high cost of long-term renting, their use during theatrical tours
may not be economically advantageous. However, using LED panels for
one-off projects like movies and commercials seems to be more
advantageous. The highlight of the discussion was the storage of the
theatre flats. She suggested that a storage system for theatre flats
could be efficient for sustainable design and reuse.

## Survey

The survey questions are prepared in order to support the research
questions of the thesis. It has nine multiple-choice questions, one with
check boxes, and ten open-ended questions, for a total of twenty
questions. The first question aims to find out their approach to
sustainability and sustainable scenic design. The purpose of the
question two through eight is to discover how aware they are of
sustainable design and to what extent they implement sustainability in
their design process. The following questions are aimed at getting
detailed answers for sustainable design challenges and solutions.

A solution proposal that emerged from the survey results is to educate
team members about sustainability and promote strong and effective
communication among team members. Additionally, as mentioned by
Bordelon,[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_14] members of the design team should be skilled in order to
propose solutions for sustainability, enabling them to use materials and
equipment more consciously and efficiently. Collaboration within the
design team, as highlighted by Jonīte,[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_15] is also a crucial factor.
The stronger the communication within the team, the faster
sustainability recommendations can be identified, implemented, and thus,
time can be saved.

## Discussion and Conclusion

The primary challenges in scenic design emanate from financial
constraints and a shortage of qualified professionals, resulting in
restricted quality, design, and sustainability practices. Budget
limitations inadvertently guide designers towards sustainable methods
like reuse, recycling, and efficient storage. However, communication
issues, time constraints, and restrictive guidelines impede designer’s
ability to fully integrate sustainability into their creations.

Storage-related challenges include inadequate space, material
congestion, and a lack of systematic storage systems, leading to
repeated production of items and unnecessary waste. Transportation
challenges include cost constraints that encourage designers to minimize
vehicles and employ lightweight, easily installable designs. While
designers exhibit sustainable choices, the extent of their conscious
decision-making remains uncertain, often driven by budget, supply, and
space considerations. To enhance sustainability, organizing awareness
events and establishing systematic storage, rental, and borrowing
systems are recommended.

Survey findings and interviews underscore challenges in fitting entire
play designs onto stages and ensuring stability and durability of stage
elements for crew and actor safety. Custom designs can limit
reusability, but exploring modular or adaptable designs is suggested for
increased sustainability. However, ethical considerations regarding
design limitations may arise.

The use of digital technology in stage design, particularly LED screens,
is posited as a sustainable alternative, reducing material consumption
and transportation energy. Nonetheless, concerns about cost and
feasibility in theatre productions on extended tours temper enthusiasm
for widespread adoption. The digital environment allows quick
transmission of designs to distant locations, aligning with
sustainability goals.

In brief, scenic design faces multifaceted challenges, necessitating a
balance between financial constraints and sustainable practices.
Recommendations include awareness initiatives, systematic storage
solutions, and judicious exploration of digital technologies to foster a
more sustainable future in scenic design.

This study focusing on scenic design process in performing arts, dwelled
particularly on the design challenges regarding the sustainable use of
props in scenic design to answer the following research questions;

1\. To what extent do scenic designers in Türkiye possess awareness
regarding the utilization of sustainability in scenic design?

2\. What design strategies do scenic designers in Türkiye employ, and
what types of materials do they prefer to utilize in order to
incorporate sustainability and recycling into scenic design?

Applied research method was selected for this study, which aims to find
a solution for an immediate problem facing a society or an industrial or
business organization.[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_16]

The study, initiated to address prop wastage in scenic design, sought
sustainable solutions amid a lack of detailed studies in the field.
Existing literature formed the basis, supplemented by data collected
from professionals. The research focused on identifying reasons for the
scarcity of literature and studies on the topic in Türkiye, highlighting
challenges such as budget limitations, professional shortages, and
issues related to prop use, transportation, and storage.

Data from literature, interviews, and surveys identified main problems
as financial constraints, lack of sustainability education, theater
equipment, and insufficient prop storage space. Proposed solutions
involved integrating sustainable design practices, considering the
historical development of scenic design, and exploring the potential of
digital technology, modular design, and sustainability in the field.
Meetings with theaters and professionals, including scenic designers
revealed shared challenges and provided insights into the stage
installation process. Sustainable solutions, including modular design,
digital technology usage, and sustainable prop creation and storage
processes, were recommended based on gathered data. Survey results
indicated positive attitudes toward sustainability among scenic
designers, despite challenges like financial constraints and inadequate
storage. Suggestions included documenting stage materials, education on
sustainability, effective communication, and collaboration within design
teams. Digital technology and modular design were proposed as potential
solutions, but their effectiveness varied based on performance
requirements.

The study aimed to fill knowledge gaps in scenic design sustainability
awareness. It proposed practical solutions, emphasizing documentation,
education, communication, and collaboration. The findings could benefit
professionals in the field and guide future research, urging a broader
exploration of sustainable practices, technologies, and materials in
scenic design.

## References

Bergfelder, Tim, Sue Harris, and Sarah Street. 2007. Film Architecture
and the Transnational Imagination: Set Design in 1930s European Cinema
in Transition. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

Bordelon, Grace. 2022. "What Does an Art Producer Do?" Chronicle.
Available at: https://work.chron.com/art-producer-do-17636.html.
(Accessed June 8, 2023).

Brako, Daniel Kofi, and Gilbert, Samuel Johnson. 2022. "Elements and
Principles of Design in Scenic Design in Ghana’s Most Beautiful Reality
TV Show: An Aesthetic Evaluation." Journal of African History, Culture
and Arts 2, no. 2 (2022): 83–93.

Gillette, J. Michael. 1987. Theatrical Design and Production: An
Introduction to Scene Design and Construction, Lighting, Sound, Costume,
and Makeup. Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield.

Gloman, Chuck B., and Rob Napoli. 2007. Scenic Design and Lighting
Techniques: A Basic Guide for Theatre. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Hart, Eric. 2017. The Prop Building Guidebook: For Theatre, Film, and
TV. New York: Focal Press.

Jonīte, Dita. 2021. "Horeogrāfija Vai Scenogrāfija? Dejotāju Koris
Latvijas Nacionālā Teātra Iestudējumā “Pūt, Vējiņi!”" (Choreography or
Living Scenography? The Dancers’ Chorus of the Production “Blow, in the
Wind!” Staged in the Latvian National Theatre). Aktuālās Problēmas
Literatūras Un Kultūras Pētniecībā Rakstu Krājums (Current Issues in
Research of Literature and Culture) 26, no. 1: 296-309.

Kothari, C. R. 2004. Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques. 2nd
ed. New Delhi: New Age International (P) Limited, Publishers.

Mussman, Amy. 2008. The Prop Master: A Guidebook for Successful
Theatrical Prop Management. Colorado: Meriwether.

Punished Props Academy. 2018. "How to Build a Material Storage Shelf for
Prop & Costume Making Supplies." Video File. YouTube.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UkFaiX7aAQs>.

Schwarz, Norbert, and Sudman, Seymour. 1996. Answering Questions.
Hoboken, NJ: Jossey-Bass.

Shedroff, Nathan. 2009. Design is the Problem: The Future of Design Must
Be Sustainable. Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media.

Sofer, Andrew. 2010. The Stage Life of Props. Michigan: University of
Michigan Press.

Strawn, Sandra J. 2013. The Properties Director’s Handbook: Managing a
Prop Shop for Theatre. Burlington, MA: Focal Press.

Wilson, Andy. 2003. Making Stage Props: A Practical Guide. Ramsbury,
Marlborough, Wiltshire: Crowood.

Wolf, R. Craig, and Dick Block. 2014. Scene Design and Stage Lighting.
Stamford, CT: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning.

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_1]: Daniel Kofi Brako and Samuel Johnson Gilbert, "Elements and
    Principles of Design in Scenic Design in Ghana’s Most Beautiful
    Reality TV Show: An Aesthetic Evaluation," Journal of African
    History, Culture and Arts 2, no. 2 (2022): 83–93.

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_2]: Tim Bergfelder, Sue Harris, and Sarah Street, Film Architecture
    and the Transnational Imagination: Set Design in 1930s European
    Cinema in Transition (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2007).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_3]: R. Craig Wolf and Dick Block, Scene Design and Stage Lighting
    (Stamford, CT: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning, 2014).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_4]: J. Michael Gillette, Theatrical Design and Production: An
    Introduction to Scene Design and Construction, Lighting, Sound,
    Costume, and Makeup (Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield, 1987).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_5]: Andrew Sofer, The Stage Life of Props (Michigan: University of
    Michigan Press, 2010).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_6]: Amy Mussman, The Prop Master: A Guidebook for Successful
    Theatrical Prop Management (Colorado: Meriwether, 2008).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_7]: Sandra J. Strawn, The Properties Director’s Handbook: Managing a
    Prop Shop for Theatre (Burlington, MA: Focal Press, 2013).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_8]: Chuck B. Gloman and Rob Napoli, Scenic Design and Lighting
    Techniques: A Basic Guide for Theatre (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2007).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_9]: Andy Wilson, Making Stage Props: A Practical Guide (Ramsbury,
    Marlborough, Wiltshire: Crowood, 2003).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_10]: Punished Props Academy, "How to Build a Material Storage Shelf
    for Prop & Costume Making Supplies," Video File, YouTube,
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UkFaiX7aAQs, 2018.

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_11]: Nathan Shedroff, Design is the Problem: The Future of Design Must
    Be Sustainable (Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media, 2009).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_12]: Eric Hart, The Prop Building Guidebook: For Theatre, Film, and TV
    (New York: Focal Press, 2017).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_13]: Norbert Schwarz and Seymour Sudman, Answering Questions (Hoboken,
    NJ: Jossey-Bass, 1996).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_14]: Grace Bordelon, "What Does an Art Producer Do?" Chronicle,
    Available at: https://work.chron.com/art-producer-do-17636.html
    (Accessed June 8, 2023).

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_15]: Dita Jonīte, "Horeogrāfija Vai Scenogrāfija? Dejotāju Koris
    Latvijas Nacionālā Teātra Iestudējumā “Pūt, Vējiņi!”" (Choreography
    or Living Scenography? The Dancers’ Chorus of the Production “Blow,
    in the Wind!” Staged in the Latvian National Theatre), Aktuālās
    Problēmas Literatūras Un Kultūras Pētniecībā Rakstu Krājums (Current
    Issues in Research of Literature and Culture) 26, no. 1 (2021):
    296-309.

[^7_S2_Karakus_Hasirci_16]: C. R. Kothari, Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques, 2nd
    ed. (New Delhi: New Age International (P) Limited, Publishers,
    2004).
