---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Design Factory Model Based on Design Thinking a Local Case: Izmir Design Factory

Hande Yıldız Çekindir

## Introduction

The dynamic landscape of collaborative innovation between academia and
industry finds a poignant reflection in the inception and evolution of
Design Thinking, culminating in the establishment of Design Factories.
This paper provides an extensive exploration of the historical roots,
theoretical foundations, and practical applications of Design Thinking
in higher education, particularly within the context of Izmir Design
Factory. Izmir Design Factory, stemming from a thorough examination of
university-industry collaborations in Izmir, aspires to bridge the gap
between academic pursuits and practical needs, steering towards a
culture of collaborative production. By drawing upon the principles of
Design Thinking, Izmir Design Factory catalyzes a co-creation ecosystem,
emphasizing inclusivity, sustainability, and innovation. The paper
delves into Izmir Design Factory's comprehensive framework spanning
education, research, and design initiatives, showcasing its endeavors in
fostering interdisciplinary collaboration, skill development, and
problem-solving. Furthermore, it elucidates Izmir Design Factory's
unique positioning, its evolution, and its vision to forge local-global
partnerships that empower regional development while driving global
competitiveness. Amidst the global network of Design Factories, Izmir
Design Factory stands as an exemplar, leveraging its unique model to
catalyze impactful change and cultivate a culture of innovation,
collaboration, and sustainable growth.

### *Design Thinking*

The recognition of design as a formal discipline and the inception of
design thinking traces back to the 1960s. Initially rooted in
architecture, design, and art, the concept gradually expanded into
management practices. In academic circles, the term gained prominence
roughly thirty years ago, initially associated with the cognitive
processes of designers. The phrase "design thinking" was first employed
by Rowe in 1987 in his book titled "Design Thinking," though Simon's
analysis[^9_S4_Cekindir_1] of design's nature predated this terminology introduction
by eighteen years.[^9_S4_Cekindir_2] Cross delved into "Designerly Ways of Knowing" in
1982 and 2001, outlining disparities among design, science, and
humanities-based on phenomena, methodologies, and values. He
characterized design as a discipline and delineated five facets of
designerly ways of knowing: addressing 'ill-defined'[^9_S4_Cekindir_3] problems,
adopting a 'solution-focused' problem-solving approach, employing
'constructive' thinking patterns, utilizing 'codes' to transform
abstract requirements into tangible entities, and employing these codes
for both 'reading' and 'writing' in 'object languages'.[^9_S4_Cekindir_4]

Design Thinking's theoretical perspectives have been classified into
five distinct sub-discourses: firstly, design thinking is perceived as
the creation of artifacts; secondly, it is viewed as a reflective
practice. Schön[^9_S4_Cekindir_5] criticized Simon's perspective of a 'science of
design' for its focus on resolving well-defined problems, highlighting
the discrepancy with the practical complexities encountered in design
and technology fields, emphasizing the need for coping with 'messy,
problematic situations.' Cross characterized design as a "reflective
practice," navigating uncertainty, instability, uniqueness, and
conflicts in values.[^9_S4_Cekindir_6] Thirdly, design thinking is seen as a
problem-solving endeavor; fourthly, as a mode of reasoning or
sense-making; finally, design thinking is regarded as the generation of
meaning.[^9_S4_Cekindir_7]

Design Thinking, in essence, involves a process encompassing problem
identification, creative solution generation, and implementation.[^9_S4_Cekindir_8]
Tim Brown, CEO of IDEO, defines it as a human-centered innovation
approach leveraging design tools to integrate people's needs,
technological possibilities, and business requirements.[^9_S4_Cekindir_9] This method
begins with diverse individuals collaborating to explore problems
empathetically, fostering a shared mindset through varied perspectives.
It aims to uncover optimal ideas through iterative prototyping and
testing, subsequently planning and executing the chosen idea's
implementation, and offering innovative solutions via creative thinking
techniques.[^9_S4_Cekindir_10] Design Thinking serves as a fundamental innovation
mindset, reflecting the evolving cultural landscape of corporations,
governmental bodies, and organizations.

As seen in the historical, theoretical, and business background of
"design thinking," the term encompasses different definitions. These
definitions include design thinking as an education approach, an
educational model, a learning model, and a metadisciplinary concept.
However, despite the variations in terminology, all of these definitions
share a common focus on the use of multidisciplinary teams and the
active involvement of diverse perspectives.

### *Design Thinking in Higher Education*

In education circles, design thinking is sometimes termed as
"design-based learning," recognized as a model that enhances creativity,
engagement, endurance, and innovation. Its pedagogical benefit lies in
empowering students to effectively collaborate in multidisciplinary
teams, instigating positive, design-driven change globally. Design
thinking, perceived as a problem-solving approach, addresses everyday
challenges.[^9_S4_Cekindir_11] Within the realm of education, Design Thinking (DT)
emerges as a valuable tool, fostering the development of
twenty-first-century skills during the teaching and learning process. It
emphasizes collaborative problem-solving, integrating real-world
considerations, user experiences, feedback, and the application of
creativity, critical thinking, and communication.[^9_S4_Cekindir_12]

Alongside the widely recognized 4C’s (Collaboration, Communication,
Critical thinking, Creativity), the '7Cs' framework proposed by Trilling
and Fadel in 2009 encompasses crucial skills including Critical thinking
and problem-solving, Creativity and innovation, Collaboration, teamwork,
and leadership, Cross-cultural understanding, Communications,
information, and media-literacy, Computing and ICT literacy, Career and
learning self-reliance. This comprehensive framework offers a holistic
suite of skills vital for success in today's rapidly evolving and
interconnected society.[^9_S4_Cekindir_13]

The inclusive approach of the Design Thinking mindset has been applied
across diverse disciplines for years to address global challenges
comprehensively. Universities have increasingly established design
thinking institutes to equip students with essential skills in creative
problem-solving and collaboration, aspects often underemphasized in
traditional education.[^9_S4_Cekindir_14] Notably, institutions like Stanford and
Potsdam established d.schools, with Stanford originating the concept in
2005 and a sister institute in Potsdam, Germany, opening in 2007,
spurred by Hasso Plattner's sponsorship. Initially, both institutions
collaborated with IDEO, a design consultancy, to instruct design
thinking, emphasizing education tailored for non-designers.[^9_S4_Cekindir_15]

Leveraging design thinking in higher education is a logical choice due
to its myriad potential benefits. Universities offer rich collaborative
environments, fostering multidisciplinary teams that amalgamate diverse
perspectives, allowing for both competitive and complementary approaches
to problem-solving.[^9_S4_Cekindir_16]

The Design Thinking approach has an iterative process consisting of
basic five steps: empathize, define, ideate, prototype, and test. The
process has divergent phases for creating choices and convergent phases
for making choices. Students from different disciplines develop
solutions to real-life problems by using a certain set of processes and
methods. In this process, learning is created through reflection. Thanks
to its application-oriented structure, it is aimed that the participants
will be able to define this mindset and DT process by themselves and
apply the methods to their personal and professional lives at the end of
the process.

## The Place for Design Thinking in Higher Education: Design Factory Model

Amidst evolving interdisciplinary challenges and competitive landscapes,
contemporary universities seek to address stakeholder complexities
through collaborative innovation. Innovation hubs exemplify the public
sector's response, including higher education, in embracing new methods
and perspectives to stimulate intra-institutional change. Models like
the Design Factory epitomize these platforms, employing design thinking
as an approach, tool, or cultural framework. They aim to foster
user-centered creative problem-solving and innovation through
experimental methodologies. These initiatives aim to enhance
collaboration efficacy across organizational silos, empower innovative
units with autonomy, and promote unconventional creative strategies
beyond traditional institutional structures.[^9_S4_Cekindir_17]

The foundations of the Design Factory are based on the establishment of
the structure, which was initially called Innovation University, but
later named Aalto University, which was established by the three best
universities of the country in Finland at the beginning of 2010. This
structure, formed by the union of Helsinki University of Technology
(HUT), Helsinki School of Economics (HSE), and University of Art and
Design Helsinki (UIAH), is based on the development of multidisciplinary
and interdisciplinary education and research.[^9_S4_Cekindir_18] The global Design
Factory models, which provide education with various programs in this
field by bringing the academy and industry together, especially at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, are becoming more widespread. In the
Design Factory model, students from different disciplines develop
alternative solutions to the real problems of companies in
multidisciplinary teams with the active support of both academic coaches
and mentors from the industry. Here, with the facilitation of the design
factory structure, knowledge is transformed into applicable products,
services, or systems, and a different learning experience is developed
for students.[^9_S4_Cekindir_19] Design Factories serve as hubs that enable intricate
networks involving diverse stakeholders such as students, educators,
researchers, administrators, and leaders across various disciplines,
departments, and educational institutions. These networks extend to
external stakeholders, encompassing entrepreneurs, industries, NGOs,
governmental bodies, funding agencies, as well as other educational and
research entities.[^9_S4_Cekindir_20]

Along with applying Design Thinking as a mindset to the education system
in diverse institutions worldwide, global networks have been created in
the DT focus, which enables common applications, and thus, similar
approaches have been spread around the world. Design Factories, that
have adopted the common Design Thinking approach, are gathered under
three main networks worldwide: Design Factory Global Network (DFGN),
Global Design Thinking Alliance (GDTA), and Sugar Network. The Design
Factory Global Network (DFGN) comprises 37 innovation hubs located
within universities and research organizations worldwide. The
participating members range from research and applied science
universities to research institutions and infrastructure. The network's
objective is to drive transformation in learning and research by
cultivating a culture centered around passion and promoting efficient
problem-solving. Through a shared understanding and standardized
approach to their work, the Design Factories within the network
collaborate effectively across diverse cultures, time zones, and
organizational structures to foster groundbreaking innovation.[^9_S4_Cekindir_21] The
HPI D-School, in collaboration with ten international educational
institutes, establishes the Global Design Thinking Alliance (GDTA). This
alliance consists of a network of institutions dedicated to teaching,
researching, and advancing the methods and mindsets of Design Thinking.
With 32 member institutions across 22 countries and five continents, the
GDTA fosters collaboration and innovation on a global scale.[^9_S4_Cekindir_22] SUGAR
is a worldwide network that facilitates collaboration between corporate
partners and students from 24 universities across four continents. This
cross-international setting enables students to learn human-centered
design tools through a hands-on, practice-based approach over the course
of an academic year. Working in global student teams, they engage in
prototyping, testing, and iterative processes to address real design
challenges presented by multinational corporate sponsors. Emphasizing
the importance of knowledge sharing and education, SUGAR organizes
global events that create an ideal environment for students and
corporate sponsors to exchange ideas and experiences.[^9_S4_Cekindir_23]

The members of the network operate under a shared philosophy and
principles, offering a familiar Design Factory environment to their
respective local communities. These Design Factories have their home
institutions and play a crucial role in higher education by addressing
the challenges of integrating new approaches within well-established
organizations. They act as change agents, promoting design-based
learning as a means to drive innovation in higher education. By
embracing the principles of Design Thinking, these institutions foster a
culture of creativity, collaboration, and problem-solving. According to
Jessop et al., the concept of "place" symbolizes the local and
traditional, while "location" or "space" represents the global and
modern.[^9_S4_Cekindir_24] Agnew also suggests that place can be seen as a node within
space, emphasizing the interconnectedness between the local and the
global.[^9_S4_Cekindir_25] In the context of Design Factories, DFs can be considered
local places, serving as specific physical locations where innovation
and learning take place. On the other hand, the network of Design
Factories represents a global space, connecting these local places and
enabling collaboration and knowledge exchange on a broader scale. This
combination of local DFs and the global DF network highlights the
significance of both place and space in fostering innovation and
education (Figure 1).

![](media/image1.tiff){width="6.5in" height="3.90625in"}Figure 1. Design
Factories (local places) as nodes in Global Networks (global spaces),
created by author
<https://graphcommons.com/graphs/59d988c5-9707-4b54-82cf-96d5b8b2935b>

Design Factories function as central hubs facilitating complex networks
that engage a wide array of participants, including students, educators,
researchers, administrators, and professionals across multiple fields,
departments, and academic organizations. These networks also involve
external stakeholders such as entrepreneurs, industries,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), government entities, funding
agencies, and additional educational and research institutions.[^9_S4_Cekindir_26]

## A Local Case: İzmir Design Factory[^9_S4_Cekindir_27]

The formation of Izmir Design Factory was the result of interviews and
research conducted with industry and university representatives in
Izmir. These studies revealed that the number of university-industry
collaborations in Türkiye is low and the success rates are low. The
reason for this is the lack of a common production culture and the
difference between academic and practical perspectives and expectations.
Design thinking was identified as an important approach to meeting
changing technology needs. It was thought that this approach could bring
a productive culture to stakeholders from different disciplines and
expectations. For this reason, the Design Factory model, which is built
based on design thinking, was brought to the agenda as a proposal for
improving the production culture of university-industry collaborations.
Within this framework, literature research was conducted on
university-industry collaborations in Türkiye, the Design Factory model,
and the design thinking education structure. In addition, interviews
were conducted with Izmir Industry and University units to identify
local needs and problems. In addition, field research and interviews
were conducted with Aalto and Porto Design Factories for the Design
Factory model. As a result, the Izmir Design Factory model, which is
localized with a global perspective, was proposed as a model that aims
to create a collaborative work culture, develop market-oriented products
and project ideas, and industrial development in Izmir. This model aims
to increase collaboration and productivity between Izmir's industry and
universities.28[^9_S4_Cekindir_28]

In 2019, following the visit to Aalto Design Factory (ADF) and Porto
Design Factory (PDF) in 2017, Izmir Design Factory was established as an
EU-funded project by localizing the design factory model, which is a
university-industry collaboration model. It aims to be an interface for
initiating collaborations based on Education, Research, and Design to
fulfill the qualified workforce needs and project needs with high-added
local stakeholders to strengthen competition in the global market
through local and international partnerships. Izmir Design Factory aims
to ensure the active contribution of the knowledge in the academy to the
industry and to reinforce the current knowledge of the students and the
academy with the current experiences in the industry with the training
to be organized in collaboration with the university and the industry
(Figure 2).

![](media/image2.tiff){width="4.01in" height="1.1666666666666667in"}

Figure 2. İzmir Design Factory logo

The model, which is aimed to be a catalyst for the formation and
dissemination of a regional co-production culture, is thought to be in a
neutral position, equidistant from every university, industry, and
institution, and also to be able to offer global solutions to local
needs by creating regional and local design factory models instead of
creating a center in the dissemination strategy.[^9_S4_Cekindir_29] For this reason,
Izmir Design Factory is an important local example that has not yet
taken its place in the global network and distinguishes it from other
global examples by not using a specific physical space. Izmir Design
Factory is a flexible platform associated with universities, the private
sector, professional chambers, and non-governmental organizations in
Türkiye. It has a multi-stakeholder structure with various national and
international collaborations with institutions such as: Originn
Coworking, EFTA, Porto Design Factory, Yaşar University, Matera Hub,
ESİAD (Aegean Industrialists and Business Association).

The core values of Izmir Design Factory, rooted in the Design Thinking
mindset, revolve around co-creation, life-centeredness, and
inclusiveness. Izmir Design Factory fosters a community where
individuals contribute while embracing cooperation, participation, and a
culture of sharing. It aims to inspire innovation by sharing knowledge
and experiences and nurturing a curious and creative atmosphere. Not
limited to human-centric concerns, Izmir Design Factory holds
responsibility towards all living beings and the environment.
Sustainability and environmental consciousness are pivotal, ensuring a
focus on future value creation. Under Izmir Design Factory 's umbrella,
everyone acknowledges their responsibility towards themselves, the team,
the community, and the world. As a collaborative platform, Izmir Design
Factory emphasizes coordination, unity, and shared action. Its adaptable
and flexible structure allows rapid adaptation, inclusivity, and growth.
Drawing from diverse disciplines and experiences, Izmir Design Factory
maintains a constantly evolving structure rather than a rigid one,
believing in the collective strength of local elements.

## Activities of Izmir Design Factory: Education, Research, And Design 

Through its activities based on education, research, and design, Izmir
Design Factory provides collaboration opportunities, allowing
universities to integrate into a broad industrial network while
contributing to students' applied learning by offering practical
experiences and research opportunities. At the same time, it diversifies
job opportunities, while for stakeholders, it strengthens the corporate
image and provides benefits such as innovative collaborations and
increased user experience. It provides easier access to human resources
and offers advantages such as target audience analysis and creative
network expansion.

### *Education*

İzmir Design Factory adopts Design Thinking (DT) as its fundamental
approach, applying it extensively within educational experiences. DT, an
interdisciplinary, human-centered creative methodology, addresses
diverse educational goals, becoming increasingly prevalent globally due
to its adaptability to contemporary needs. Izmir Design Factory doesn't
limit itself to specific design realms; instead, it integrates design
principles into broader frameworks. It emphasizes empowering
participants to tackle problems and enhance existing conditions.

Izmir Design Factory designs and executes interdisciplinary training
programs, aiming to introduce DT to local and wider audiences, enabling
individuals and institutions to integrate DT into their professional and
daily lives. Collaborating with universities and industries, Izmir
Design Factory focuses on co-designed educational programs to create a
shared language accessible to people of all ages and fields.

Through university-industry collaboration, Izmir Design Factory ensures
the exchange of knowledge between academia and industry while enhancing
students' experiences and knowledge. In-house training fosters a
motivated workforce, empowering their solution-oriented abilities and
collaborative skills, thereby contributing to regional development.

One significant initiative by Izmir Design Factory is an undergraduate
Design Thinking course in collaboration with Yaşar University and
Originn. This learner-centered course adopts a hands-on, participatory
approach to foster self-awareness, problem-solving skills, and teamwork
within a diverse community. Participants engage in projects addressing
both daily and stakeholder-related issues, exploring various
perspectives, and proposing solutions. The course covers 15 weeks
consisting of an exercise project and a partner project with the
team-facilitator-partner collaboration.

The course has adapted the Design Thinking mindset in terms of people,
place, and process approach. While ‘people’ -students, facilitators,
instructors, research assistants, partners, mentors- and ‘process’
-non-linear Design Thinking process- have been stable during the course,
‘place’ is different as physical and virtual environments. The
one-semester interdisciplinary Design Thinking learning process in
higher education, designed as a part of an EU-funded project has been
applied in three different places: university campus, coworking space,
and virtual environment in the 2019-2020 spring term. The course process
started on the university campus. It continued in a local co-working
space to experience the Design Thinking process in a more creative
environment rather than the regular space for education. In the pandemic
period, it turned completely digital as a result of not being able to
use the physical space, and the learners completed the process using
different online platforms (Figure 3).

![A group of people in a room Description automatically
generated](media/image3.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.68125in"}

Figure 3. Diverse Learning Environments in Design Thinking Course:

Originn Co-working Space, Yaşar University Campus, Virtual Environment,
Source: Author

In the inaugural 2019-2020 academic year spring semester, the course
engaged 54 participants from 13 disciplines across 3 universities,
completing several practice and partner projects. The subsequent course
in the 2020-2021 academic year fall semester involved 29 participants
from 8 disciplines across 5 universities, focusing on
sustainability-related projects for stakeholders like Viessmann Germany
and local food communities in İzmir and Istanbul. These projects
targeted diverse challenges such as sustainable air conditioning and
food community sustainability.

### *Research*

Izmir Design Factory, born from comprehensive research, aims to address
challenges prevalent in university-industry collaborations. Key elements
like communication, collaboration, inquiry, and creativity were
identified as crucial for sustainable partnerships. It fosters a
flexible, inclusive, and community-driven structure catering to
individuals and institutions to ensure enduring value. Operating in a
non-hierarchical, ever-evolving environment, Izmir Design Factory
encourages engagement among students, educators, researchers, and
professionals. Emphasizing multidisciplinary efforts, it serves as a hub
for design, education, research, and academic inquiry. By bringing
together diverse researchers, Izmir Design Factory F contributes to
regional development by fostering an R&D culture. By uniting
professionals from varied fields, Izmir Design Factory aims to merge
practical expertise with theory, continually evolving its offerings.
This amalgamation of diverse expertise ensures Izmir Design Factory 's
sustained growth and development.

### *Design*

Izmir Design Factory prioritizes communication, collaboration, inquiry,
and creativity within its creative community, emphasizing the need for a
skilled workforce capable of self-awareness, problem-solving, and
communal production. Design serves as the primary vehicle for developing
these skills, seen as the process of problem-solving and proposing
solutions. Izmir Design Factory 's goal is to cultivate competent
projects, train a skilled workforce through university-industry
collaboration, and innovate various business models by engaging
professionals.

Izmir Design Factory serves as a platform uniting professionals and
learners to address issues within companies, institutions, and
organizations. It provides a space for individuals to showcase their
potential, fostering creative growth through cross-disciplinary
experiences. Izmir Design Factory has designed and led different
co-design processes such as co.creathon and design marathon, as well as
the interdisciplinary Design Thinking course it has run for two
semesters at the university.

The Co.Creathon, a 10-day service design process, emerged from Izmir
Design Factory alumni's desire to create local value, focusing on
sustainable fashion awareness. In the first session, 21 participants
from diverse disciplines developed projects for Notion Collective.

Similarly, the Design Marathon condenses the DT process into a 3-day
format. The Circular Design Marathon, in partnership with ESİAD (Aegean
Industrialists and Business Association), involved 7 participants from
various disciplines working on resource efficiency in the textile
industry.

Izmir Design Factory Internship, a 3-week program at Porto Design
Factory, serves as a follow-up to the Design Thinking Course. In a
recent internship, 10 Izmir Design Factory alumni from different
disciplines collaborated on sustaining Izmir Design Factory in Izmir,
conducting research under the guidance of coordinators at Porto Design
Factory (Figure 4).

![](media/image4.tiff){width="6.5in" height="3.120833333333333in"}Figure
4. Izmir Design Factory Interns at PDF (Porto Design Factory), created
by Izmir Design Factory alumni

Izmir Design Factory celebrated its 3-year project adventure with the
final hybrid event Izmir Design Factoryair at Originn and brought
together its interdisciplinary network formed with national and
international connections based on university-industry collaboration
(Figure 5).

![](media/image5.tiff){width="6.5in" height="4.356944444444444in"}Figure
5. Izmir Design Factory network, created by author
https://graphcommons.com/graphs/d7b739a4-c381-468d-b283-ae556bb6854f?show=settings

## Conclusion

The university-industry collaboration model, a globally accepted
approach for developing competitive products, is exemplified by Design
Factories. However, studies across Türkiye show limited numbers and
success rates in implementing such collaborations. METU Design Factory,
established in Ankara in 2015 and part of the DFGN global network,
pioneered this model in Türkiye, supported by the Ministry of
Development. In response to the need for a similar collaboration model
in İzmir, the İzmir Design Factory emerged under the guidance of the
city's creative industries. Distinct from METU Design Factory and global
examples, Izmir Design Factory aims for independent operation while
fostering university collaboration. With an EU project's conclusion in
December 2021, Izmir Design Factory gained increased autonomy while
maintaining stakeholder collaborations. It aspires to focus on design,
education, and research, aligning with global networks, spearheaded by
Originn Creative Hub, the project coordinator.

Izmir Design Factory emphasizes a localized response, prioritizing
trust, sharing, and creation. Its core objective is to cultivate a
co-production culture, harnessing existing potential and internal
solutions. This model envisions a project-based culture rooted in Design
Thinking, bringing diverse disciplines together to address current
technological demands and market competition. Sustainable development
will pivot on the culture of collaboration fostered within Izmir Design
Factory. Projects will cater to SMEs' needs, nurturing an R&D culture
and bolstering regional development. Joint training initiatives by
universities and industries aim to bridge academic knowledge with
industry experience. By enhancing local human resources, Izmir Design
Factory targets the creation of high-value, qualified projects.
Positioned as an intermediary organization, it strives for a neutral
stance among universities and industries, proposing regional Design
Factory models to meet local needs globally. The ultimate goal is to
establish an organization focused on design, education, and research,
addressing local stakeholder demands for skilled human resources and
high-value projects to bolster global competitiveness through local
development and international partnerships.

## Acknowledgments

The author thanks the Izmir Design Factory, its team, and its network
for allowing the data to be used in this paper.

## References

Agnew, John, and David Livingstone. 2011. Space and Place. In Handbook
of Geographical Knowledge, London: SAGE Publications Ltd. Accessed
\[date\]. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446201091.

Björklund, Tua A., Teo Keipi, Sine Celik, and Kalevi Ekman. 2019.
"Learning Across Silos: Design Factories as Hubs for Co‐creation."
European Journal of Education 54, no. 4 (2019): 552–565. Accessed
\[date\]. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12372.

Brown, Tim. 2009. Change by Design. IDEO, Harper Collins.

Cross, Nigel. 1982. "Designerly Ways of Knowing." Design Studies 3, no.
4 (1982): 221–227. Accessed \[date\].
https://doi.org/10.1016/0142-694x(82)90040-0.

Cross, Nigel. 2001. Designerly Ways of Knowing: Design Discipline Versus
Design.

Gönen, Esra, and Güvenir, Can. 2019. "Tasarım Odaklı Düşünce ile
Üniversite Sanayi İşbirliği Modeli." Business and Organization Research.
Presented at the International Conference, Izmir, Yaşar University,
4th-6th September 2019.

Global Design Thinking Alliance. n.d. "About Us." Accessed \[date\].
\[Online\] Available at: https://gdta.org/about-us/.

Design Factory Global Network. n.d. Accessed \[date\]. \[Online\]
Available at: https://dfgn.org/.

IDEO. 2012. Design Thinking for Educators. IDEO.

İzmir Design Factory. n.d. Accessed \[date\]. \[Online\] Available at:
https://www.izmirdesignfactory.com/.

Johansson-Sköldberg, Ulla, Jill Woodilla, and Mehves Çetinkaya. 2013.
"Design Thinking: Past, Present and Possible Futures." Creativity and
Innovation Management 22, no. 2 (2013): 121–146. doi:10.1111/caim.12023.

Kelley, David, and Tom Kelley. 2013. Creative Confidence: Unleashing the
Creative Potential Within Us All. IDEO, Crown Business.

Luka, Ineta. 2014. "Design Thinking in Pedagogy." Journal of Education,
Culture and Society 5, no. 2 (2014): 63-74. Accessed \[date\].
\[Online\] Available at: https://doi.org/10.15503/jecs20142.63.74.

Rauth, Ingo, Elke Köppen, Birgit Jobst, and Christoph Meinel. 2010.
"Design Thinking: An Educational Model towards Creative Confidence." In
First International Conference on Design Creativity, ICDC 2010, 29
November - 1 December 2010, Kobe, Japan.

Schön, Donald. 1982. The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals
Think in Action. New York: Basic Books.

Simon, Herbert A. 1969. The Sciences of the Artificial. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.

SUGAR Network. n.d. Accessed \[date\]. \[Online\] Available at:
https://www.sugar-network.org/network/.

Thienen, Julia von, Royalty, Adam, and Meinel, Christoph. 2017. "Design
Thinking in Higher Education." In Handbook of Research on Creative
Problem-Solving Skill Development in Higher Education, Advances in
Higher Education and Professional Development, 306-328.
doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0643-0.ch014.

Trilling, Bernie, and Charles Fadel. 21st Century Skills: Learning for
Life in Our Times. San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, 2009.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_1]: Herbert A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial (Cambridge, MA:
    The MIT Press, 1969).

[^9_S4_Cekindir_2]: Ineta Luka, "Design Thinking in Pedagogy," Journal of Education
    Culture and Society 5, no. 2 (2014): 63-74,
    https://doi.org/10.15503/jecs20142.63.74.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_3]: Nigel Cross, "Designerly ways of knowing," Design Studies 3, no. 4
    (1982): 221–227, https://doi.org/10.1016/0142-694x(82)90040-0.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_4]: Donald Schön, The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think
    in Action (New York: Basic Books, 1982).

[^9_S4_Cekindir_5]: Nigel Cross, Designerly Ways of Knowing: Design Discipline Versus
    Design (2001).

[^9_S4_Cekindir_6]: Ulla Johansson-Sköldberg, Jill Woodilla, and Mehves Çetinkaya,
    "Design Thinking: Past, Present and Possible Futures," Creativity
    and Innovation Management 22, no. 2 (2013): 121–146,
    doi:10.1111/caim.12023.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_7]: David Kelley and Tom Kelley, Creative Confidence: Unleashing the
    Creative Potential Within Us All (IDEO, Crown Business, 2013).

[^9_S4_Cekindir_8]: Tim Brown, Change by Design (IDEO, Harper Collins, 2009).

[^9_S4_Cekindir_9]: IDEO, Design Thinking for Educators (IDEO, 2012).

[^9_S4_Cekindir_10]: Ingo Rauth, Eva Köppen, Birgit Jobst, and Christoph Meinel,
    "Design Thinking: An Educational Model towards Creative Confidence,"
    First International Conference on Design Creativity, ICDC 2010, 29
    November - 1 December 2010, Kobe, Japan, 2010.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_11]: Luka, "Design Thinking in Pedagogy".

[^9_S4_Cekindir_12]: Bernie Trilling and Charles Fadel, 21st Century Skills: Learning
    for Life in Our Times (San Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, 2009).

[^9_S4_Cekindir_13]: Jan Von Thienen, Alexander Royalty, and Christoph Meinel, "Design
    Thinking in Higher Education," in Handbook of Research on Creative
    Problem-Solving Skill Development in Higher Education, Advances in
    Higher Education and Professional Development, 306-328,
    doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-0643-0.ch014, 2017.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_14]: Rauth, Köppen, Jobst, and Meinel, Design Thinking: An Educational
    Model towards Creative Confidence.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_15]: Tua A. Björklund, Teo Keipi, Sine Celik, and Kalevi Ekman,
    "Learning across silos: Design factories as hubs for co‐creation,"
    European Journal of Education 54, no. 4 (2019): 552–565,
    https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12372.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_16]: Tua A. Björklund, Teo Keipi, Sine Celik, and Kalevi Ekman,
    "Learning across silos: Design factories as hubs for co‐creation,"
    European Journal of Education 54, no. 4 (2019): 552–565,
    https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12372.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_17]: Esra Gönen and Can Güvenir, "Tasarım Odaklı Düşünce ile
    Üniversite Sanayi İşbirliği Modeli," Business and Organization
    Research Izmir (International Conference), 4th-6th September 2019,
    Yaşar University, 2019.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_18]: Esra Gönen and Can Güvenir, "Tasarım Odaklı Düşünce ile
    Üniversite Sanayi İşbirliği Modeli," Business and Organization
    Research Izmir (International Conference), 4th-6th September 2019,
    Yaşar University, 2019.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_19]: Björklund, Keipi, Celik, and Ekman, Learning across silos: Design
    factories as hubs for co‐creation.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_20]: Design Factory Global Network, n.d., https://dfgn.org/.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_21]: Design Factory Global Network, n.d., https://dfgn.org/.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_22]: SUGAR Network, n.d., https://www.sugar-network.org/network/.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_23]: Bob Jessop, Neil Brenner, and Martin Jones, "Theorizing
    Sociospatial Relations," Environment and Planning D: Society and
    Space 26, no. 3 (2008): 389-401, https://doi.org/10.1068/d9107.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_24]: Agnew, John, and David Livingstone. "Space and Place." Handbook
    of Geographical Knowledge. London: SAGE Publications Ltd., 2011.
    https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446201091.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_25]: Björklund, Keipi, Celik, and Ekman, Learning across silos: Design
    factories as hubs for co‐creation.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_26]: The information in this chapter is mostly compiled by the author,
    who has been working as a researcher, facilitator and assistant at
    Izmir Design Factory since 2019.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_27]: Gönen and Güvenir, Tasarım Odaklı Düşünce ile Üniversite Sanayi
    İşbirliği Modeli.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_28]: Gönen and Güvenir, Tasarım Odaklı Düşünce ile Üniversite Sanayi
    İşbirliği Modeli.

[^9_S4_Cekindir_29]: The information in this chapter is mostly compiled by the author,
    who has been working as a researcher, facilitator and assistant at
    Izmir Design Factory since 2019.
